Journal of Religion in Africa 40 (2010) 375-412

brill.nl/jra

‘All Women are Guides’: Suﬁ Leadership and 
Womanhood among Taalibe Baay in Senegal

Sociology, Anthropology, Psychology & Egyptology Department

American University in Cairo

Joseph Hill

P.O. Box 74

New Cairo 11835, Egypt
josephhill@aucegypt.edu

Abstract
In Suﬁ Islamic groups in West Africa, the position of muqaddam, one appointed as a spiritual 
guide,  is  usually  held  by  men.  Although  Senegalese  Shaykh  Ibrahim  Niasse  (1900-1975) 
appointed many Senegalese women as muqaddams throughout his life, few of his disciples were 
aware of these appointments. Since the 1990s a growing number of ‘Taalibe Baay’ (disciples of 
Niasse) women have more openly led active communities of disciples. Several factors have made 
it possible for these women to act uncontroversially as recognized leaders, including (1) Baye 
Niasse’s popularization of mystical knowledge and authority, making them available to the gen-
eral body of disciples, (2) the urbanization of the Taalibe Baay movement and (3) global and 
local processes raising Muslim women’s visibility as objects of discourse and as active religious 
and economic actors. While these women sometimes draw on global discourses of gender equal-
ity, to a much larger extent they base their religious authority on embodying and performing the 
interiority and submissiveness conventionally associated with pious women.

Keywords
Islam, women, Suﬁsm, Senegal, gender, feminism

Introduction
Adja Moussoukoro Mbaye is the oﬃcial spiritual guide or ‘mother’ (mère) of a 
large religious federation of students at Dakar’s university and other institu-
tions of higher education. Additionally, she leads a daayira1 (religious associa-
tion) that totals over one hundred young people—slightly more men than 
women—whom  she  has  personally  initiated  into  the Tijānī  Suﬁ  order  and 
taught to ‘know God’ through tarbiya (spiritual education). Her disciples, or 
‘spiritual children’ as she calls them, meet several times a week at her house or 

© Koninklijke Brill NV, Leiden, 2010 

DOI: 10.1163/157006610X540735

Downloaded from Brill.com12/10/2020 08:54:48PM
via University of Florida

376 

J. Hill / Journal of Religion in Africa 40 (2010) 375-412

that of a disciple for various religious activities, such as chanting the name of 
God (dhikr). Two students aﬃliated with the student federation,2 along with 
her son-in-law, whom she has appointed as a spiritual guide (muqaddam), led 
me to her Dakar apartment, where she welcomed us warmly. Sitting across 
from us in her living room, her face framed in a dark, gold-embroidered scarf 
draped over her shoulders, she spoke with a measured and calm voice, exuding 
conﬁdence  and  gentleness.  During  the  1990s  Adja  Moussoukoro  received 
written authorization (ʾijāza) from a male religious leader to act as a muqadd-
ama (feminine form of muqaddam), or a spiritual guide representing the Tijānī 
Suﬁ  order. Yet  she  remained  silent  about  her  appointment  for  at  least  ﬁve 
years, she says, until God ‘revealed’ (  feeñal) her by guiding disciples to her. She 
has since given similar authorization to several men in her daayira, including 
one of the men who accompanied me on my ﬁrst interview with her. In 2009, 
she gave an ʾijāza to her own mother. Over several subsequent visits, I encoun-
tered many young disciples who had come to receive tarbiya, to socialize with 
one another, or to plan upcoming activities for their daayira. During one of 
our conversations in 2009, a medical student accompanying me told her, ‘You 
are our mother, you are our spiritual guide (sëriñ), you are our everything’.

When I asked Adja Moussoukoro whether anyone had opposed her acting 
as a muqaddam, a leadership role typically reserved for men in Senegal, the 
ﬁfty-something holy woman immediately shook her head. To the contrary, she 
said, prominent male muqaddams often send young people to her to be initi-
ated into the secrets of divine knowledge. She told us that these leaders recog-
nize that, like childbirth, the perilous process of Suﬁ initiation requires a guide 
naturally inclined to nurture and care for new initiates, who are most often 
young people particularly in need of guidance. ‘A muqaddam is your spiritual 
parent’, she told me. Another prominent muqaddama in Dakar similarly told 
me that ‘muqaddam is just a name, but all women are muqaddamas, because 
all women are educators (yarkat)’. Other female religious leaders in the Fayḍa 
(ﬂood)—the global movement within the Tijānī Suﬁ order of those who fol-
low Senegalese Shaykh Ibrahim Niasse (1900-1975)3—invariably agreed that 
being a woman and being a spiritual guide naturally went together.

Although  Shaykh  Ibrahim,  better  known  in  Senegal  as  ‘Baye’  (‘Baay’: 
‘Father’ in Wolof), appointed numerous women as muqaddamas throughout 
his life—some report as early as 1940 during the Fayḍa’s initial rural boom—
most of these women’s appointments were never widely publicized. Women 
only began openly to lead large disciple associations (daayira) in the late 1990s, 
when  the  Fayḍa  transformed  from  what  most  Senegalese  perceived  as  an 
obscure regional group to a ‘veritable vogue among urban youth’ (Seesemann 
2009, 226). Over the past ten years, I have interviewed ﬁfteen muqaddamas in 

Downloaded from Brill.com12/10/2020 08:54:48PM
via University of Florida

 

J. Hill / Journal of Religion in Africa 40 (2010) 375-412 

377

Figure 1.  Two muqaddamas, Aïda Thiam (center) and Bousso Dramé (right), 

with a disciple in Thiaroye, a suburb of Dakar.

Dakar, Kaolack and other Senegalese towns, often accompanied by Senegalese 
members of a research association,4 and other association members have inter-
viewed several others in my absence. All of these muqaddamas are ‘Taalibe 
Baay’—‘Disciples of Baye’, as Senegalese members of the Fayḍa movement 
most often refer to themselves. It would be impossible to determine the exact 
number of Taalibe Baay muqaddams in Senegal, male or female.5 The Fayḍa’s 
expansion brings constant new appointments, many of which remain unknown 
for several years or even a muqaddam’s entire life. Some of my collaborators 
who freely introduced me to male muqaddams hesitated to mention muqadd-
amas, uncomfortable about bringing a proper Muslim woman out into the 
open. I have observed, however, that thousands of disciples, male and female, 
look to these muqaddamas as personal spiritual guides and as leaders of their 
lay religious associations (daayiras). Unlike the handful of African Suﬁ women 
leaders  mentioned  in  the  academic  literature  (Hutson  1999,  2001,  2004; 
Cifuentes 2008; Boyd 1989; Coulon 1988; Coulon and Reveyrand 1990), 
most Taalibe Baay muqaddamas are not daughters or wives of religious leaders 
and therefore have no hereditary claim to baraka (divine blessing) or author-
ity. Indeed, many discovered the Fayḍa as adults and had pursued no more 
than  the  same  basic  Qurʾānic  education  that  nearly  all  of  their  peers  had 

Downloaded from Brill.com12/10/2020 08:54:48PM
via University of Florida

378 

J. Hill / Journal of Religion in Africa 40 (2010) 375-412

attained. However, even those who lack the educational credentials conven-
tionally required of muqaddams are recognized by many mainstream disciples 
and the highly literate central Taalibe Baay leadership as eﬀective leaders and 
spiritual guides.

Although these women describe the work of the spiritual guide as naturally 
consonant with their characteristics as women, they profoundly unsettled my 
assumptions about Islamic authority in Senegal. Around 94 per cent of all 
Senegalese today are Muslims, of which 95 per cent identify with some Suﬁ 
order.6 Much of the considerable body of scholarship on Islam in Senegal has 
focused on the Senegalese state’s ‘exceptional’ political arrangement (Villalón 
1995;  Cruise  O’Brien  1996),  wherein  high-proﬁle  Suﬁ  leaders  mediate 
between the secular state and blocs of disciples, thereby contributing to the 
state’s unusual stability (Behrman 1970; Cruise O’Brien 1971; Copans 1980; 
Coulon 1981; Villalón 1995). Focusing on high-proﬁle male (and overwhelm-
ingly Murid) religious personalities and their implications for governance, this 
literature’s scant mention of women scarcely goes beyond general discussions 
of marriage and other customs relating to them (for example Monteil 1980). 
Until  recently,  the  sole  Senegalese  woman  leader  extensively  discussed  was 
Sokhna Magat Diop, who succeeded her father, an important regional khalīfa7 
of the Murid Suﬁ order in Thiès who left no son (Coulon 1988; Coulon and 
Reveyrand 1990; Creevey 1996). Such exceptions seem to conﬁrm the rule 
that Senegalese Islam is ‘thoroughly male-dominated in its public, religious 
manifestations’ (Evers Rosander 2003, 5).

This article aims to explain how women have been able to present them-
selves openly as Suﬁ spiritual guides, especially in Dakar, despite prevalent and 
longstanding  assumptions  that  such  positions  of  religious  authority  are 
reserved  for  men.  This  question  involves  examining  both  larger  historical 
changes and how individual women cultivate and present themselves as moral 
authorities.  After  brieﬂy  discussing  anthropological  approaches  to  Muslim 
women as religious agents, I discuss two historical shifts that have enabled 
Taalibe Baay women to exercise religious leadership more openly. The ﬁrst is 
Baye Niasse’s teaching, beginning in 1929, that all could directly know God 
through a relatively short mystical education (tarbiya); this has attracted mil-
lions worldwide while opening the door of Suﬁ authority to many who did 
not have years of textual specialization and mystical apprenticeship. Although 
few of the many women Baye Niasse appointed as muqaddamas were widely 
known, his descendants and other close disciples have continued his prece-
dent. The second shift is the movement’s accelerating growth and urbanization 
since the 1990s. Not only have larger economic and political conditions led 
women into more prominent positions during this period, but the Fayḍa’s 

Downloaded from Brill.com12/10/2020 08:54:48PM
via University of Florida

 

J. Hill / Journal of Religion in Africa 40 (2010) 375-412 

379

accelerating growth during this period has created leadership opportunities, 
and in Dakar’s diﬀuse space of religious authority many religious specialists 
can operate in the same territory.

It is in this context that women actively cultivate, legitimate, and practice 
religious authority. The ﬁnal section of this article focuses on one muqaddama 
in Dakar who illustrates muqaddamas’ paradoxical task of making hiddenness 
visible while veiling acts of showing. If muqaddamas are to cultivate moral 
authority their possession of hidden knowledge must somehow appear, and 
they must publicly demonstrate the reserved piety expected of proper Muslim 
women. Many muqaddamas I have interviewed not only cultivated but accen-
tuated the ‘interiority’ (Boddy 1989; Masquelier 2009) and submissiveness 
conventionally associated with women’s piety, performing these qualities as 
icons (Peirce 1955) of hidden Suﬁ knowledge and of the submission to God 
that is the very meaning of the term ‘Islam’. Many also assimilated the nurtur-
ing process of spiritual tutelage and women’s natural mothering inclination. 
However, interiority and submission can only heighten moral authority when 
diﬀerentiated from mere social withdrawal and subservience. Women leaders 
must  show  enough  to  be  recognized  as  authorities  while  cultivating  and 
performing the hiddenness that indexes a Muslim woman’s piety. They con-
stantly  navigate  between  and  even  mobilize  the  tensions  between  multiple 
oppositions—the hidden (bāṭin) and the apparent (ẓāhir), the distinctions of 
God’s law (Sharīʿa) and the unity of mystical reality (ḥaqīqa), humility (suufe 
bopp)  and  prestige  (daraja),  a  sense  of  restraint/shame  (kersa)  and  showing 
oneself (wonewu).

Islam, Authority and Women’s Agency

Muslim women’s religious agency has gradually become a central question in 
scholarship on West Africa since Boyd and Last (1985) called on scholars to 
examine women’s religious lives and to explain rather than take for granted 
their  absences  from  available  records.  Commenting  on  a  broad  pattern  of 
women’s marginalization from formal and legalistic Islamic authority in West 
Africa, Coulon concludes that mystical tendencies are better able than ‘reform-
ist or fundamentalist Islam . . . to tackle [women’s] particular problems and to 
give expression to their own sociability’ (1988, 117-118). Indeed, many have 
observed women gravitating toward more unoﬃcial and ecstatic practices in 
which behaviors ordinarily deﬁned as incompatible with feminine decorum 
can  be  sanctioned  (Strobel  1979;  Lewis  1989).  Spirit  possession  practices 
throughout much of Africa are largely a women’s aﬀair since men often favor 

Downloaded from Brill.com12/10/2020 08:54:48PM
via University of Florida

380 

J. Hill / Journal of Religion in Africa 40 (2010) 375-412

exorcism over possession in the name of Islamic orthodoxy (Lambek 1981; 
Boddy 1989; Rasmussen 1995; Kenyon 1995; Masquelier 2001). Male stu-
dents have often been the driving force behind reformist8 movements (Launay 
1992; Masquelier 1999; Gomez-Perez et al. 2009), whose condemnation of 
‘wasteful’ life-cycle rituals that move income into female-dominated spaces 
has  resonated  with  struggling  young  men  (Masquelier  1999,  2009;  Janson 
2005).  In  Senegal,  where  the  male-dominated  hierarchy  is  Suﬁsm,  Murid 
women  have  found  many  ways  of  obtaining  blessing  (baraka/barke),  merit 
(thawāb/tuyaaba) and prestige (daraja) in their religious communities outside 
the masculine spaces of formal religious authority from which they are largely 
excluded  (Evers  Rosander  1997,  1998,  2004;  Buggenhagen  2001,  2008, 
2009a).

However, women’s participation in a range of Islamic movements compli-
cates generalizations claiming one tendency or another as more responsive to 
women’s  needs.  Urban Taalibe  Baay  women’s  increasingly  prominent  roles 
within  this  Suﬁ  movement  since  the  1990s  have  coincided  with  women’s 
increasing  prominence  in  numerous  Islamic  movements  throughout  West 
Africa, from Salafī-inspired Islamist reformism (Loimeier 2003; Augis 2005, 
2009;  Schulz  2008),  to  reformist  daʿwa  (preaching)  (Janson  2005,  2007, 
2008), to Suﬁ revival movements (Kane and Villalón 1998; Villalón 2003; 
Schulz 2006; Masquelier 2009) and local movements that defy such categories 
(Schulz 2003; Soares 2004). Despite the pervasive tendency of religious con-
troversies to present a clear opposition between reformism and Suﬁsm/tradi-
tionalism  (Soares  2004;  Masquelier  2009),  movements  that  prominently 
involve women span this divide and often share several characteristics: invok-
ing textual authenticity against entrenched traditions and authority structures, 
emphasizing  individual  Muslims’  self-cultivation  as  pious  subjects,  actively 
involving women as fully accountable members and religious agents (while 
upholding gendered division of labor and roles), and preaching the universal 
availability of Islamic knowledge. Taken together, recent studies suggest that 
women’s commitment to a movement depends less on how ‘liberal’ its atti-
tudes are toward them than on the degree to which it assumes their moral 
agency  and  actively  involves  them  in  religious  life.  The  most  ‘conservative’ 
reformist movements with regards to women’s dress, seclusion and patriarchy 
often work to expand women’s education, involve them in preaching, and task 
them with publicly modeling proper attire and piety (Loimeier 1997; Umar 
2001; Schulz 2008), even encouraging men to share in domestic work in order 
to allow women more time to preach (Janson 2008).

Consequently,  the  question  of  women’s  self-realization  as  pious  Muslim 
subjects—which for many women involves cultivating submissive dispositions 

Downloaded from Brill.com12/10/2020 08:54:48PM
via University of Florida

 

J. Hill / Journal of Religion in Africa 40 (2010) 375-412 

381

toward  men  and  God—has  required  scholars  to  ‘parochialize’  the  feminist 
subject’s assumed universal struggle for autonomy and freedom against domi-
nation  (Mahmood  2001a,  203).  At  the  same  time,  Muslim  and  Western 
women’s subjectivities and struggles do not exist in separate universes but are 
‘intertwined’ (Abu-Lughod 1998; Deeb 2006), especially as liberal discourses 
of ‘women’s liberation’ and ‘equality’ have globalized. Muslim women situate 
themselves using ‘hybrid’ discourses (Bakhtin 1981) drawing on multiple tra-
ditions.  A  hybrid  utterance,  according  to  Bakhtin,  combines  contrasting 
points of view while maintaining the tension between them, refracting them 
through an authorial purpose that may contrast sharply with those implied by 
the voices it utilizes. For example, like Islamist Shi’i women in Lebanon (Deeb 
2009), many Taalibe Baay women condemn Western values in terms of grand 
‘civilizational binarisms’ while simultaneously using Western optics to defend 
Islamic values. Like many Taalibe Baay women leaders, Adja Moussoukoro 
defends feminine modesty and veiling as a path for ‘women’s liberation’ from 
sexual exploitation and invokes women’s interiority and motherhood as justi-
ﬁcations for women’s more public roles as Suﬁ leaders.

To say that women appropriate conventional attitudes toward demure fem-
inine piety as they challenge a male monopoly on religious authority is not to 
posit  autonomous  agents  applying  tactics  of  resistance  (Certeau  1984)  or 
‘weapons of the weak’ (Scott 1987) against patriarchy. None of the Senegalese 
muqaddamas I interviewed, regardless of educational or career background, 
suggested that they viewed themselves as resisting a patriarchal system. Con-
versely, their acute insights into the complexities of gender dynamics rule out 
that they are passively, blindly, or despondently upholding such a system. To 
understand these women as agents I bring into conversation three comple-
mentary notions of subjectivity that studies of Muslim women have invoked, 
often separately from one another. The ﬁrst is that of the subject of larger 
social norms and regimes of knowledge and authority that shape the subject’s 
dispositions and preferences. Thus, Janice Boddy (1989) observed that Suda-
nese women embodied a largely tacit and stable habitus (Bourdieu 1977) of 
interiority or enclosure that shaped their practices, preferences and discourses 
(on femininity as interiority see also Hirschon 1981; Laqueur 1990; Young 
1990;  Morris  1995).  In  other  contexts,  anthropologists  have  noted  similar 
habitual associations between the oppositions of male/female and up/down 
(Gilmore 1996). A second tendency, questioning the notion that habitus is 
determined by relatively stable objective structures, has shown that religious 
subjects, as members of communities oriented toward religious change, culti-
vate their own dispositions and experiences—their habitus—through discipli-
nary  religious  practices  (Starrett  1995,  1998;  Hirschkind  2001;  Mahmood 

Downloaded from Brill.com12/10/2020 08:54:48PM
via University of Florida

382 

J. Hill / Journal of Religion in Africa 40 (2010) 375-412

2001a, 2001b, 2005). Approaching the habitus as a malleable object of disci-
plinary  practices,  these  scholars  draw  less  on  Bourdieu  than  on  Foucault 
(Foucault 1997a, 1997b, 1997c) and Talal Asad (1993, 2000, 2006). A third 
sense  is  that  of  speaking  and  acting  subjects  who  improvise,  perform,  and 
engage  in  practical  situations.  For  example,  Lara  Deeb  (2006,  2009)  has 
shown how women draw on multiple moral models and discourses to engage 
in local and transnational publics and institutions.

I  see  these  approaches  not  as  competing  but  as  complementary.  From  a 
young age, like the Sudanese women Boddy observed, both urban and rural 
Taalibe Baay women embody ‘feminine’ behaviors of interiority and domes-
ticity that subtly shape their inclinations. An urban Senegalese mother repeat-
edly tells her small daughter ‘Sit! Girls don’t stand!’ The girl sits, her arms 
clasping her folded knees, on the ﬂoor with several other women, neither up 
on a chair nor with legs extended like the boys. Another mother chides her 
daughter, ‘Kneel when you bring your father water!’, a behavior that I observed 
women repeat for her husbands even if they had far more economic and social 
capital  than  their  husbands.  Girls  in  almost  every Taalibe  Baay  household 
I visited spent much of their time performing domestic tasks. While running 
errands, both boys and girls might walk similar distances from home (see Katz 
1993 on Sudan), yet boys are typically allowed much more free time to play 
and  socialize  with  friends,  often  outside  the  home.  The  Qurʾān  is  widely 
understood to prescribe that the husband go out and work to support the fam-
ily while the wife stays in to take care of domestic matters. Even women who 
earn far more than their husbands manage all cooking, cleaning, and child-
care, even if they delegate to maids or daughters. In practice, sharing domestic 
work with several other women in a large, often polygynous household makes 
it easier for many women to work outside the home than Western counter-
parts in nuclear families—and a husband’s inability to provide may demand 
it.  Yet  despite  important  exceptions,  I  have  found  that  the  expectation  of 
opposing roles and behaviors of men and women are nearly universal among 
Taalibe Baay.

However, making sense of Taalibe Baay women’s active use of interiority, 
submission,  and  motherhood  requires  looking  beyond  binary  oppositions, 
stable  norms  and  a  purely  tacit  habitus.  First,  interiority  is  not  a  uniquely 
feminine moral attribute any more than exteriority is an unambiguously posi-
tive masculine attribute. Respectable men and women must both cultivate the 
moral  quality  of  kersa,  which  anthropologists  have  translated  as  ‘nobility’, 
‘honor’, ‘restraint’, and ‘sangfroid ’.9 Perhaps most generally, it means ‘shame’: 
‘to have kersa’ can mean both ‘to have a sense of shame’ and ‘to feel ashamed/
embarrassed’. Kersa demands a degree of interiority of both men and women, 

Downloaded from Brill.com12/10/2020 08:54:48PM
via University of Florida

 

J. Hill / Journal of Religion in Africa 40 (2010) 375-412 

383

requiring them not to put themselves ‘out there’, for example, through speak-
ing too loudly and openly or dressing immodestly. Still, the bar of kersa for 
women is relatively higher than for men: ways of acting, dressing, or speaking 
that are acceptable for a man may show a lack of kersa for a woman in a simi-
lar situation. In religious contexts, however, the more pious and mystical a 
man is the more his behavior tends to approach the level of interiority exem-
pliﬁed  by  a  decent  woman.  Many  of  the  most  charismatic  Taalibe  Baay 
muqaddams veil in public, at least to the same degree that pious women are 
taught to cover themselves (albeit not in the same way), make elaborate shows 
of submission to other leaders (albeit not to their wives), sit close to the ground 
and speak quietly through animators (jottalikat, someone of lower status who 
broadcasts  to  an  audience  the  speech  of  someone  of  higher  status—see 
below),10 all of which enhances their aura of piety and mysticism.

Furthermore, if the interior dispositions girls embody from an early age 
tacitly shape their attitudes in many unconscious ways, such behaviors are also 
the object of constant talk and painstaking disciplinary practices to reﬁne one’s 
piety and good behavior. Baye Niasse explicitly presented Suﬁsm as a system 
of discipline, as clearly shown in his ﬁrst work, The Spirit of Good Morals (Rūḥ 
al-ʾAdab, Niasse [Ñas] 1998), whose title could well be translated as The Spirit 
of Discipline.11 In it he describes the behaviors and thoughts the disciple should 
focus on while reciting the daily Tijānī litanies (wird) in order to bring about 
correct attitudes and experiences. After describing how the disciple must ﬁnd 
and submit to a ‘complete shaykh’ in order for the shaykh to perform poten-
tially painful operations on his or her soul, Niasse exhorts the disciple: ‘Be 
God fearing, a man of humility’12 for ‘you will not by humility be in abase-
ment’. To illustrate, he contrasts several ‘low-pitched’ Arabic words for desir-
able things (knowledge, wealth, fertility) with their ‘high-pitched’ opposites 
(ignorance,  poverty,  infertility),  and  states  that  ﬂoods  settle  in  low  places 
(Niasse [Ñas] 1998, 53-54).

The  potential  confusion  between  humility  and  abasement  engenders  a 
dilemma for Suﬁ women leaders: the social roles they play involve submission, 
domesticity, and withdrawal from publicity, yet they must diﬀerentiate these 
behaviors  from  social  inferiority,  servitude,  and  a  lack  of  conﬁdence.  Like 
Muslim women in many other communities (for example Mahmood 2005; 
Augis 2009), Taalibe Baay women leaders describe acts of wifely submission 
as expressions of submission to God’s law (Sharīʿa) and of their sincere desire 
to  care  for  husbands  and  family.  Yet  they  also  emphasize  a  deeper  reality 
(ḥaqīqa) behind this law according to which all social distinctions are illusory. 
Sayyidah13 Khady Diop,14 a muqaddama in Dakar, demonstrated that negoti-
ating these opposing principles is an ongoing process. She once described her 

Downloaded from Brill.com12/10/2020 08:54:48PM
via University of Florida

384 

J. Hill / Journal of Religion in Africa 40 (2010) 375-412

exasperation when, as she was busy helping a client in her successful business, 
her husband sat and asked her to bring him water. She complied. Sayyida 
Khady’s initial explanation of this practice suggests a conscious ‘patriarchal 
bargain’  (Kandiyoti  1988)—a  pound  of  ﬂesh  she  was  willing  to  give  in 
exchange for peace and autonomy. Her previous husband, she explained, a 
member of the reformist ʿIbād ar-Raḥmān (Ibaadu) movement, was ‘liberated’ 
and forbade kneeling before anyone but God and did not expect these provin-
cial (‘Saalum’) behaviors, and she agreed with him. However, despite recogniz-
ing  that  kneeling  or  curtsying  while  serving  men  water  is  not  an  Islamic 
prescription, she advises disciples to comply if in a context where such behav-
iors are viewed as synonymous with good manners (yar). What matters is the 
intention, which should be to show respect and not veneration for the person. 
In a conversation a year later, Sayyida Khady seemed less resigned than com-
mitted  to  distinctions  between  men’s  and  women’s  roles:  modern  society’s 
problems  would  go  away,  she  said,  if  everyone  played  their  role,  especially 
women giving their children a proper upbringing. Her import business was 
still growing, yet she described dividing her attention equally between three 
tasks—God, her family, and her business—emphasizing especially her atten-
tion to serving and pleasing her husband. Her account of playing one’s role 
well in whatever situation one may ﬁnd oneself, including kneeling when serv-
ing water, suggests that cultivating a single set of pious dispositions may some-
times  be  less  important  than  adjusting  one’s  behavior  to  the  situation  and 
assigning it a proper meaning.

Sayyida Khady’s position may seem a mere bargain with or capitulation to 
patriarchy if one were not aware of the myriad ways in which she and other 
muqaddamas signal that in a deeper (bāṭin) sense playing a submissive role 
might  mean  the  opposite  of  what  it  appears  to  mean.  Some  muqaddamas 
explicitly describe acts of submissiveness and interiority as ritual performances 
demonstrating obedience to God’s prescriptions, highlighting the opposition 
between the performance’s apparent (ẓāhir) meaning and the hidden (bāṭin) 
truth behind it. Such a ‘performance’ is neither a disingenuous charade nor a 
naïve reproduction of social roles but rather an act presented as an act intended 
to have multiple interpretations. Of course, whether such a performance suc-
cessfully raises a woman’s moral standing and religious authority depends on 
its ‘felicity’ (Austin 1962)—on whether viewers perceive and accept the hid-
den meaning. As the ﬁnal section of this article shows, muqaddamas’ ongoing 
eﬀorts to present feminine kersa and related practices of submission and inte-
riority not as indexes of ‘abasement’ but of moral authority depend not only 
on disciplined mastery of a pious habitus but also on improvised, performative 
engagement in publics where such behaviors can be evaluated.

Downloaded from Brill.com12/10/2020 08:54:48PM
via University of Florida

 

J. Hill / Journal of Religion in Africa 40 (2010) 375-412 

385

The  use  of  the  term  ‘publics’  in  this  context  requires  some  clariﬁcation. 
These leaders may seem the very opposite of public: few speak in large Taalibe 
Baay meetings held in streets and public squares, many do not even address 
their own daayiras’ outdoor weekly meetings, and only senior daughters of 
Baye Niasse are occasionally recognized by the government and news media as 
religious  leaders.  Yet  their  domestic  spaces  become  ‘internal  public  spaces’ 
(Cooper 1997a) in which disciples assemble to learn about and discuss reli-
gious and other matters. Muqaddamas use such spaces to move into or inﬂu-
ence ‘external public spaces’, for example, organizing daayira meetings and 
conferences or running Qurʾānic schools and large Islamic institutes. Women’s 
relative absence from the visible publics of religion and politics stems not only 
from their relegation to more private roles but on their exclusion from the 
male-dominated inner spaces—‘hidden publics’—such as patronage networks 
on which those visible public spaces depend (Beck 2003). Male religious lead-
ers often receive male guests and plan public events in their bedrooms but 
meet with women only in their courtyard or larger receiving room (for a prec-
edent, see Niyās [Ñas] 1993a, 111). Thus, the categorical association of men 
with public and women with private is not as straightforward as it sometimes 
seems. Yet women leaders’ general absence from exterior spaces has concrete 
consequences:  despite  growing  awareness  of  their  existence,  many  Taalibe 
Baay still know little about them and assume that they do not (or should not) 
initiate disciples as men do.

Before  discussing  a  speciﬁc  example  of  how  contemporary Taalibe  Baay 
women present and exercise religious authority, the next two sections outline 
some  of  the  historical  conditions  in  which  they  are  operating,  including 
Fayḍa’s origins, women’s long but hidden history of participation and leader-
ship, and the movement’s rapid urban growth, which has more recently led 
women to take on more visible leadership roles.

Women in the ‘Flood’ (Fayḍa): Universalizing Mystical Knowledge

Although accounts of the Fayḍa’s history, both within Taalibe Baay circles and 
in the academic literature, tend to name few or no women, women have a long 
history of appointment as muqaddams and of largely hidden leadership. Only 
since the 1990s and especially since 2000, however, have women openly led 
daayiras and been generally known as spiritual guides. Contemporary women’s 
increasingly visible leadership has been facilitated both by contemporary con-
ditions and by speciﬁc teachings and actions of the Fayḍa’s founder, Shaykh 
Ibrahim (Baye) Niasse. First, Baye popularized mystical knowledge, promising 

Downloaded from Brill.com12/10/2020 08:54:48PM
via University of Florida

386 

J. Hill / Journal of Religion in Africa 40 (2010) 375-412

any disciple, male or female, religious specialist or non-specialist, to have per-
sonal, mystical knowledge of God. Additionally, he appointed many women 
as muqaddamas, even though few disciples are aware of these women’s appoint-
ments and Baye himself seems to have thought it more proper not to speak of 
them openly and to protect pious Muslim women from the public gaze. This 
section brieﬂy outlines Baye Niasse’s complex approach to women and reli-
gious knowledge and authority, and the following section outlines conditions 
that set the stage for contemporary women’s more visible leadership.

In 1929 in the village of Kossi Mbitéyène near the city of Kaolack, twenty-
eight-year-old Ibrayima Niasse, announced to his small group of disciples that 
he had inaugurated the Fayḍa, or ‘Flood’ of Divine Knowledge, an event pre-
dicted by the founder of the Tijānī Suﬁ order.15 Through a new and relatively 
quick process of tarbiya, or mystical education at his hands or through one of 
his muqaddams, the Fayḍa promised to enable all disciples, male or female, to 
attain a direct, mystical knowledge (maʿrifa) of God without a lengthy textual 
or mystical apprenticeship (Hiskett 1980; Gray 1998; Hill 2007a; Seesemann 
2009). As a junior son of El-Hadj Abdoulaye Niasse (d. 1922), the preemi-
nent Tijānī leader in Saalum, Baye’s claim to be the Khalīfa of the whole Tijānī 
Suﬁ order, a position superior to his elders, led to a rift in his family and their 
disciples.  Additionally,  the  Fayḍa  raised  controversy  wherever  it  reached, 
largely because disciples often entered a state of jadhb (ecstasy or insanity)16—
a loss of self-consciousness as one is overpowered by an awareness of God—
and  pronounced  apparent  blasphemies  such  as  ‘I  am  God’  (Hiskett  1980; 
Seesemann 2004).

Yet it is precisely this promise of universally available, direct, ecstatic, mysti-
cal  knowledge  of  God  that  has  attracted  millions  of  disciples  worldwide. 
Meanwhile,  Baye’s  erudition  and  eloquence  in  Arabic  prose  and  poetry 
appealed to religious elites and safeguarded the movement’s reputation as more 
than a popular charismatic movement. Until recently the Fayḍa had spread 
little within Senegal beyond Baye Niasse’s home of western Saalum (see Hill 
2007a for an explanation). It fared much better abroad, ﬁrst reaching Mauri-
tania, then Northern Nigeria and other parts of Sudanic Africa (Paden 1973; 
Hiskett 1980; Seesemann 2004, 2000). While the most eminent muqaddams 
still tended to be (almost always male) Islamic scholars, a particularly dedi-
cated disciple of any social background could now reach a high level of spir-
itual knowledge and be given a formal appointment (ʾijāza) as a muqaddam.

Women’s access to the kind of lengthy textual education typically required 
of muqaddams was and remains limited. Not only did families most often 
compel girls to leave school earlier than their brothers to help with housework 
or marry (still a common pattern), but girls could not leave the protection of 
their home to participate in the itinerant religious education that was gener-

Downloaded from Brill.com12/10/2020 08:54:48PM
via University of Florida

 

J. Hill / Journal of Religion in Africa 40 (2010) 375-412 

387

ally a prerequisite to becoming a religious specialist. Baye Niasse set the unu-
sual  example  of  supporting  women’s  education  by  having  all  his  daughters 
memorize  the  Qurʾān  and  classical  texts  of  Islamic  pedagogy  alongside  his 
sons, although they generally left their formal studies around the time they 
married (generally in their late teens) while their brothers traveled to Morocco 
or Egypt for their secondary and university education. His attention to his 
daughters’  education  was  unheard  of  at  the  time:  daughters  of  Senegalese 
shaykhs  had  scarcely  been  required  to  learn  more  than  a  small  part  of  the 
Qurʾān (Ṣamb [Sàmb] 1979, 39). His disciples have in part followed his exam-
ple: nearly all Taalibe Baay girls in Senegal study the Qurʾān for some time,17 
although few have studied Islam to the degree of his senior daughters, and 
many still face family pressure to drop out of school early.

Thus the Fayḍa’s appeal to most women was not so much Baye’s emphasis 
on women’s textual education but his oﬀer of a relatively short path to mysti-
cal knowledge without textual prerequisites. Women of all backgrounds could 
pursue mystical knowledge—and occasionally religious leadership—alongside 
their domestic duties. Moreover, like spirit possession practices across Sudanic 
Africa (Boddy 1989; Masquelier 2001; Kenyon 2007), dreams and ecstatic 
states (ḥāl) allowed women, within certain bounds, to ﬂout rules of feminine 
decorum.

As  today,  the  movement’s  initial  growth  was  driven  overwhelmingly  by 
youth. Baye Niasse’s ﬁrst muqaddams were his peers and juniors. The most 
widely repeated oral and written accounts, which list only men as the ﬁrst 
tarbiya initiates (for example, Ñas n.d.), omit the fact that, as the Fayḍa began, 
Baye Niasse assigned a childhood friend, Ibra Fall,18 to initiate any women 
who asked for tarbiya. Fall’s son El-Hadj Abdoulaye Fall reports that Ibra Fall’s 
ﬁrst initiates were Baye Niasse’s mother, Astou Diankha followed by three of 
Niasse’s wives. After initiating a string of ﬁve other women, Ibra Fall refused 
the tenth. Baye Niasse had initiated only ﬁve at this point, he reasoned, and 
since Islamic law weighs two women’s testimonies against that of one man, 
initiating ten would rival his leader.19 Although this story only represents the 
Fayḍa’s opening moment, it suggests that the Fayḍa initially attracted twice as 
many women as men.

After  this  point,  however,  there  were  no  restrictions  on  the  number  of 
women initiated or on who could initiate them. One interviewee, Ummi Géy, 
described walking to Kossi against her husband’s orders to be initiated by Baye 
Niasse himself.20 Although women were not allowed to leave home without 
their  husband’s  permission,  families  that  accepted  the  Fayḍa  excused  these 
women retroactively as following God’s will and not their own. Many women 
returned to their villages to play leading roles in the religious community—
organizing  meetings,  recruiting  new  disciples  and  either  working  in  ﬁelds 

Downloaded from Brill.com12/10/2020 08:54:48PM
via University of Florida

388 

J. Hill / Journal of Religion in Africa 40 (2010) 375-412

whose harvest was dedicated to Baye or staying home to cook meals for those 
engaged in such work.

Baye Niasse’s many statements on women consistently aﬃrm their spiritual 
equality to men while insisting on Sharīʿa’s strict separation and distinction 
between men and women in worldly matters. A 1941 fatwā (legal opinion) 
declares that muqaddamas can initiate both men and women but also forbids 
women from shaking male disciples’ hands and even suggests they should not 
see one another during instruction—restrictions not typically followed today 
([Ñas] 1969, 159). Nearly all the muqaddamas we interviewed cited a line 
from his poetry (generally translated into Wolof): ‘Oh daughters, vie [with 
men] to attain the loftiest places, but not in material things’.21 Elsewhere in 
the same work Niasse explains that he receives unrelated women only during 
public  visiting  times  because  women  are  the  ‘world’s  ruination’  since  their 
allure destroys many learned men (Niyās [Ñas] 1993a, 111). Other poems 
similarly uphold women’s potentially high spiritual level despite seclusion in 
the domestic realm and the fact that silent worship is preferable for them over 
chanting aloud (for example [Ñas] 1969, 131; Niyās [Ñas] 1993b, 87). Taken 
together, Baye Niasse’s sayings and actions suggest a complex outlook toward 
women:  they  should  preferably  be  kept  from  public  view,  partly  to  avoid 
potentially  destructive  contact  with  men,  yet  in  spiritual  matters  they  can 
attain  the  same  stations  as  men.  By  insisting  that  his  own  daughters  seek 
advanced learning—albeit while staying at home rather than accompanying 
his sons to study in Cairo or Morocco—and taking them with him on pil-
grimage, Baye Niasse demonstrated a commitment to women’s religious and 
intellectual development under close supervision. Like Islam’s foundational 
texts, Niasse’s double-edged teachings have lent themselves to a range of posi-
tions regarding women.

Throughout his life Baye Niasse appointed many women as muqaddamas, 
of whom only his daughters are well known, and many disciples I spoke with 
were  quite  certain  that  Baye  never  intended  even  them  to  act  as  spiritual 
guides. These daughters include Faatumata Zaara, Maryaama, Umm Kalsuum, 
Umm  al-Khayri,  Roqiyata  (‘Yata  Baye’),  and  Naﬁsatu  (‘Naﬁ  Baye’).  Many 
other  daughters  and  granddaughters  have  appointments  from  others.  The 
elder daughters married to muqaddams generally refrained from giving tarbiya 
during their husbands’ lifetime, citing respect for their husband’s senior posi-
tion as a muqaddam much as junior muqaddams in villages do.22 Yet today all 
of Baye Niasse’s muqaddam daughters whom I met give tarbiya to men and 
women, except Faatumata Zaara because of her failing health. Nearly all also 
head daayiras or federations of daayiras, appoint muqaddams, host students 

Downloaded from Brill.com12/10/2020 08:54:48PM
via University of Florida

 

J. Hill / Journal of Religion in Africa 40 (2010) 375-412 

389

from West African countries, and tour these same countries. Several run inter-
nationally known Islamic schools.

While it is beyond this article’s scope to discuss Baye Niasse’s daughters in 
detail, it is important to mention that, even if formal titles such as khalīfa are 
reserved for senior sons, senior daughters are still recognized in many (often 
hidden)  ways  as  the  highest  authority.  Shaykh  Hasan  Cissé,  Imam  of  the 
Medina Baye mosque from 1982 until his death in 2008, was by far the most 
prominent global Tijānī leader despite not bearing the title of Khalīfa. His 
renown stems largely from his outstanding erudition and leadership skills, as 
well as his father, Baye Niasse’s spiritual heir Aliou Cissé. Yet although Aliou 
Cissé had older sons through other wives, Shaykh Hasan was Faatumata Zaara 
Niasse’s oldest, and it is certainly no coincidence that this uniquely inﬂuential 
Tijānī was Baye Niasse’s oldest child’s oldest child. Shaykha Marième Niasse’s 
status as Baye Niasse’s oldest child in Dakar also suggests that seniority trumps 
gender.  Shaykha  Marième  describes  herself  as  Dakar’s  highest Taalibe  Baye 
authority despite her younger brother Baaba Lamin’s oﬃcial title as the family’s 
Khalīfa  there.  Not  only  did  some  disciples  conﬁrm  this  verbally  but  I  saw 
many cases where disciples around Dakar approached her as a uniquely beloved 
and esteemed leader. While neither of these women is formally appointed as 
the highest authority, both suggest that many disciples approach them as the 
highest bāṭin authority nonetheless.

Baye  Niasse  appointed  many  other  muqaddamas  as  well.  In  interviews, 
Roqiyata Niasse and Shaykha Marième Niasse listed several, both rural and 
urban, Senegalese and Nigerian, some of whom they knew gave tarbiya and 
others  who  apparently  did  not.  What  all  these  women  share  is  that  their 
appointments were generally hidden, even to many who knew them. Perhaps 
most  controversial,  several  credible  informants  reported  that  Baye  Niasse 
appointed four muqaddamas in the village of Darou Mbitéyène, probably dur-
ing the early 1940s.23 These women, we were told, actively gave wird and tar-
biya to women and organized sikkar meetings. Subsequent interviews in Darou 
Mbitéyène  produced  contradictory  statements.  Some  elders  aﬃrmed  these 
reports during one interview24 but later25 denied that the women had been 
formally appointed. It appeared that they had conferred between interviews 
and decided not to repeat this unusual story about women leaders.

While the available testimony regarding these early women is limited and 
contested, their described roles are consistent with roles Baye Niasse would 
have observed Tijānī women playing elsewhere. In 1937, Baye performed his 
ﬁrst pilgrimage and met a group of Tijānīs residing in Medina who had already 
appointed muqaddamas to lead the Tijānī women there. During this eventful 
pilgrimage, this same group appointed a Nigerian woman, Hajiya Maymunatu 

Downloaded from Brill.com12/10/2020 08:54:48PM
via University of Florida

390 

J. Hill / Journal of Religion in Africa 40 (2010) 375-412

Iya,  part  of  the  entourage  of  the  Emir  of  Kano  Abdallahi  Bayero  (Hutson 
1999). The Emir and his entourage quickly became disciples of Baye Niasse 
(Paden 1973; Loimeier 1997), and Hajiya Iya thus became the ﬁrst Nigerian 
muqaddama aﬃliated with the Fayḍa, although she was neither the ﬁrst nor 
the  last Tijānī  muqaddama  in  Kano  (Hutson  1999,  2001,  2004).  Like  the 
described Darou Mbitéyène women, Northern Nigerian and Saudi Arabian 
muqaddamas  led  in  segregated  women’s  spaces.  Appointing  muqaddamas 
in these places did not move women into men’s places but allowed them to 
study and worship apart from men. Baye Niasse’s early writings encourage the 
gender  segregation  and  seclusion  he  observed  among  Tijānīs  in  Northern 
Nigeria, Mauritania,26 and Saudi Arabia but that have never been common 
in Senegal.

Yet possibly because of his general policy of going along with locally accepted 
practices wherever possible, Baye Niasse made no sustained attempt to imple-
ment within Senegal the longstanding practice in Northern Nigeria of having 
women instruct other women in texts and Suﬁsm. Largely due to strict gender 
segregation,  women’s  religious  leadership  and  scholarship  within  women’s 
spaces are far more established in Northern Nigeria than in Senegal, especially 
in cities like Kano and Sokoto (Mack n.d.; Boyd and Last 1985; Boyd 1989; 
Sule  and  Starratt  1991).  Senegalese  women  only  began  to  act  as  spiritual 
guides more openly when the Fayḍa became an urban movement there as it 
had long been in Northern Nigeria.

The Fayḍa in Dakar: Creating Spaces of Religious Authority

Women’s rising visibility in the Fayḍa is connected to global developments 
that have increased public awareness of Muslim women as both subjects and 
objects of discourse. From Islamists to secular activists to Western heads of 
state, every side holds Muslim women up as a ‘barometer’ of civilization (Deeb 
2009); ‘saving’ them even became a pretext for the United States military inva-
sion of Afghanistan (Abu-Lughod 2002; Hirschkind and Mahmood 2002). 
International institutions (United Nations programs, the World Bank, and 
the International Monetary Fund) have allied with state policies, local non-
governmental organizations, and the news media to place women at the center 
of  development  policies  (Klenk  2004;  Rathgeber  1990;  Razavi  and  Miller 
1995),  especially  since  these  institutions  have  shifted  their  focus  to  local 
non-governmental  organizations  (NGOs)  since  the  1990s.27  West  African 
Islamic  leaders  have  founded  NGOs  that  focus  signiﬁcantly  on  women’s 
issues—education, maternal health, domestic abuse28—and organize regular 
conferences  on  such  topics  as  ‘Women,  Islam,  and  Development’.  Several 

Downloaded from Brill.com12/10/2020 08:54:48PM
via University of Florida

 

J. Hill / Journal of Religion in Africa 40 (2010) 375-412 

391

crises since the 1980s related to structural adjustment, most concretely felt in 
the  1994  devaluation  of  the  West  African  CFA  Franc,  have  robbed  male 
household heads of prestige as youth and women surpass them in education 
and earnings (Mustafa 2001, 2006; Perry 2005, 2009). Transmigrant men’s 
absences leave women back home with more prominent roles (Buggenhagen 
2004),  while  transmigrant  women,  who  often  earn  authorities’  trust  and 
therefore travel more easily than men (Bava 2000), gain prestige by contribut-
ing  ﬁnancially  to  kin  networks,  religious  leaders,  and  religious  associations 
back home (Evers Rosander 2004). In this context, Taalibe Baay women lead-
ers have found wide acceptance in Dakar.

More particularly, youth ﬂooding into Dakar from smaller towns and vil-
lages have turned to the Fayḍa to provide a new urban community and sense 
of moral order as they venture outside their families’ social and religious net-
works. This has created a large demand for leaders to guide these youth. It is 
perhaps no coincidence that, like the Fayḍa, Islamic reform movements in 
Senegambia began in the 1930s (Loimeier 1994, 1996, 2000; Gomez-Perez 
1998) yet have only become highly visible and popular since the 1990s (Augis 
2005, 2009; Janson 2006, 2008). While reformist movements and the Fayḍa 
have often presented themselves as antitheses (in other parts of Africa long 
before in Senegal—see Hiskett 1980; Loimeier 1997; Seesemann 2000; Kane 
2003), their shared concern with universalizing religious knowledge, cultivat-
ing  individual  piety,  and  involving  women  have  made  both  popular  with 
newly urban youth. A number of Taalibe Baay muqaddams in Dakar had been 
active in the reformist Jamāʿat ʿIbād ar-Raḥmān (Ibaadu) before entering the 
Fayḍa, including two women we interviewed, Maam Jaara Buuso Daraame, 
who was born to a Murid family, and Adja Moussoukoro Mbaye. Despite 
contrasting conceptions of religious knowledge and authority, both kinds of 
movements oﬀer a sense of community, individual fulﬁllment, and intellec-
tual  stimulation  to  urban  youth.  Like  Sunnite  reformists  in  Dakar  (Augis 
2005), Taalibe  Baay  hail  from  diverse  educational  and  social  backgrounds, 
although  they  are  most  concentrated  in  suburbs  with  a  high  proportion 
of  immigrants  from  other  regions  of  Senegal,  such  as  Parcelles  Assainies, 
Géjawaay, and Pikin.

From  my  initial  research  in  Senegal  in  1998  to  my  most  recent  visit  in 
2010, I have seen the Fayḍa change its reputation from that of a provincial, 
allegedly low-caste ‘brotherhood’ generally called the ‘Ñaseen’ (on the Ñaseen’s 
disputed ‘blacksmith’ caste origins, see Seesemann 2004, 2009; Hill 2007a) to 
that of a highly dynamic urban movement. The Fayḍa’s public presence in 
Dakar has depended not only on numeric growth but also on plugging into 
the nation-state and the mass media as other Suﬁ groups had done long before 
(Hill 2007b). It has also involved myriad acts of publicity by disciples and 

Downloaded from Brill.com12/10/2020 08:54:48PM
via University of Florida

392 

J. Hill / Journal of Religion in Africa 40 (2010) 375-412

daayiras. Reproduced images of Baye Niasse and other Taalibe Baay, once rare, 
have become ubiquitous, and Taalibe Baay cassette reproducers have set up 
market stalls alongside those of competing Suﬁ groups. Some of Senegal’s fore-
most rappers have become Taalibe Baay and praise Baye in their most popular 
songs. When walking through a suburban neighborhood at dusk, I now often 
hear  the  distinctive  Medina  Baye  tonality  of  the Tijānī  waẓīfa,  something 
I rarely heard previously. Many disciples reported hearing such meetings and 
going back later to ﬁnd out more about them.

Many of the daayiras I visited in Dakar’s suburbs were ethnically mixed 
youth groups of mostly recent urban immigrants, especially Pulaar speakers 
from  the  Senegal  River Valley  and Wolof  and  Serer  speakers  from  Saalum 
(where the Fayḍa was born but has historically been a minority). Most had 
undergone tarbiya at some point within the previous two or three years, often 
shortly after arriving in Dakar. In such an environment, there is a great demand 
for a large number of muqaddams to initiate the many young people entering 
into the Fayḍa. The rate of muqaddamas’ appointments correlates directly with 
the  Fayḍa’s  urban  growth,  with  several  appointed  in  the  1990s  and  new 
appointments accelerating since 2000.

Additionally, cities disentangle religious specializations that in villages are 
combined in a single leader, allowing non-traditional categories of people to 
act as muqaddams. Baye Niasse established a practice in villages of assigning a 
single shaykh to represent him and to act as an all-around religious authority, 
a status normally passed on to his sons. Other muqaddams I met in villages 
refrained from acting as spiritual guides to show respect for this shaykh. In 
Dakar’s more ﬂexible space, one needs only an ʾijāza and, ideally, direct or 
indirect authorization of Baaba Lamin Niasse to act as a spiritual guide. In 
many  neighborhoods,  many  muqaddams  operate  without  any  sense  of 
encroaching on one another’s territory.

Thus a conﬂuence of factors has led to both an acceptance of and demand 
for women’s religious leadership in Dakar. As women cultivate and exercise 
religious authority in this setting, they confront paradoxes such as making vis-
ible pious qualities of interiority and submissiveness. The following section 
builds on a single ethnographic vignette to illustrate how women use rather 
than challenge prevalent gender distinctions as they perform the roles of pious 
women and religious authorities.

Making Hiddenness Visible: Sayyida Zeynabou Mbathie

After the late afternoon prayer (ʿasr, tàkkusaan) a research associate and I vis-
ited with Sayyida Zeynabou Mbathie and her husband, a white-collar bank 

Downloaded from Brill.com12/10/2020 08:54:48PM
via University of Florida

 

J. Hill / Journal of Religion in Africa 40 (2010) 375-412 

393

employee, as a string of young men and women came through her receiving 
room to greet her before heading back out to the street, where other young 
people had begun to spread several large woven plastic mats for the Friday 
ḥaḍra (group litany). The youngest Taalibe Baay muqaddama I have known, 
thirty-ﬁve-year-old Sayyida Zeynabou Mbathie describes herself as working 
‘two jobs’. Her day job since 2007, when a friendly jinne (spirit) began visiting 
her, has been to mediate for this jinne to perform divinations and to cure prob-
lems, mostly caused by less friendly jinnes. Her second job came six months 
later (although not directly connected), when Baye Niasse’s Khalīfa in Medina 
Baye, Ahmad ‘Daam’ Niasse (d. 2010), signed and sent through his son an 
ʾijāza appointing her as a muqaddama. She describes the jinne as a close friend 
and benefactor. He not only personally teaches her how to cure people but 
advises her on how to run her daayira, and even bought her a house in Medina 
Baye and in Dakar so that she could serve her growing number of disciples 
and clients without inconveniencing the rest of the family.

After conversing with us for a few minutes, she stretched her hands out 
palms up (the motion one makes to ‘accept’ [nangu] a prayer) and asked her 
husband to pray for us before we all joined the disciples outside. Conven-
iently,  this  street  in  Dakar’s  middle-class  Derkilé  neighborhood  was  under 
construction,  and  a  large  pile  of  sand  blocked  cars  from  interrupting  her 
daayira’s street meeting. A larger-than-life portrait of Baye Ibra Fall, the legen-
dary disciple of the rival Murid Suﬁ order, overlooked the meeting place from 
a nearby wooden kiosk. A couple of young men were busy running an exten-
sion cord from inside her house to an ampliﬁer in the middle of the seating 
area as several others attached two conical, gray loudspeakers to nearby electric 
poles. Several youth wore the daayira’s uniform: lime-green cotton trousers 
and a short, white xaftaan (robe) with an image of a mosque and the name of 
the daayira, ‘Chifa Al Askham’29 (‘Healing aﬄictions’), stenciled in green on 
the back. Those without uniforms wore similarly colored outﬁts, and all the 
women have draped their heads and shoulders in ﬂowing, white scarves.30

Around ﬁfteen men sat in a rectangle around the edges of a large mat. The 
muqaddama’s husband sat at their head on the east side, where he would need 
to be when it came time to lead the sundown prayer. The women, roughly 
equal  in  number  to  the  men,  sat  in  a  smaller  section  facing  east  toward 
the men’s circle. Sayyida Zeynabou sat at their front and center. Whereas in 
other ḥaḍrahs I have attended men have closed a circle with women sitting 
outside, in this case they left the west side open so that their leader could face 
into the circle from the women’s section. She motioned her husband to begin 
leading  the  ḥaḍra  (because  women  lead  neither  ḥaḍra  nor  prayer),  and  all 
joined in chanting the litany, counting oﬀ each short prayer formula on their 
prayer beads (kurus). Meanwhile the sound men tweaked the sound level and 

Downloaded from Brill.com12/10/2020 08:54:48PM
via University of Florida

394 

J. Hill / Journal of Religion in Africa 40 (2010) 375-412

speakers’ direction to minimize microphone feedback, then passed the micro-
phone between several male disciples to carry the chants through the neigh-
borhood. The chant tune distinguished this Taalibe Baay meeting from those 
of other branches of the Tijānī order. Finishing the Friday ḥaḍra just before 
sundown, the men formed lines behind Sayyida Zeynabou’s husband and the 
women behind them for the prayer. Following the sundown prayer, the par-
ticipants resumed their places for the second litany, the waẓīfa, which disciples 
are to be recite as a group every evening. A nearby street lamp dimly lit the 
meeting as the sky quickly blackened.

Following the two litanies, two male sikkarkats (chant leaders) led a core 
group  of  men  in  sikkar  (from  dhikr  Allāh  or  ‘naming  God’),  repeating 
‘Lā ʾilāha ʾillā Allāh’ (‘There is no god but Allāh’) and ‘Allāh’ interspersed with 
Baye Niasse’s poetry praising the Prophet Muḥammad. A leader called a slow, 
sustained sikkar into the microphone then held it out to several other men, 
who rocked back and forth as they called back the leader’s tune. Not long after 
they began chanting, a woman discretely arrived and sat next to Sayyida Zey-
nabou, dressed not in the daayira’s colors but in a multicolored Mauritanian-
style malaﬀa, a wrap that covers all but the face and hands and obscures the 
body’s form. Over the past two or three years Aïda Faye, a childhood friend of 
Sayyida Zeynabou, has become the biggest superstar of the Taalibe Baay sikkar 
circuit. In addition to being the ﬁrst woman to become a widely known Taal-
ibe Baay sikkarkat in Senegal, Aïda Faye received an appointment as muqadd-
ama from a son of Roqiyata Niasse one year ago. Although I had never met her 
before, her voice had been a daily presence through my friends’ cell phone 
ring-tones, portable MP3 collections and boom boxes.

Aïda Faye bowed her head listening as the men led the chant for nearly an 
hour,  after  which  they  handed  her  a  microphone.  She  spent  the  next  two 
hours alternating with—and at times engaging in virtuosic contests with—the 
male sikkar leaders. Between melismatic sikkar and staid Arabic poetry, she 
sang more syncopated Wolof praise songs for Baye composed by his early dis-
ciples,  eliciting  calls  of  appreciation  (ëskëy!)  from  the  audience.  Her  eyes 
remained closed throughout, her penetrating voice echoing throughout the 
neighborhood yet her face vacant as if she were somewhere else. Minutes into 
Aïda Faye’s chant, a young man entered a state of jadhb (ecstasy or insanity), 
leaping up, screaming and thrashing about ﬁercely. Several other men use all 
their force to hold down the majdhūb (one experiencing jadhb, literally, one 
who is seized or dragged along) to prevent injuries, and a woman brought a 
cup of water for the men to give the majdhūb. One by one, several young men 
and women went through the same state, and on several occasions the same 
man who had mustered all his calm and strength to hold down one disciple 

Downloaded from Brill.com12/10/2020 08:54:48PM
via University of Florida

 

J. Hill / Journal of Religion in Africa 40 (2010) 375-412 

395

Figure 2.  Sayyida Aïda Faye (with microphone) chanting sikkar with Sayyida 

Zeynabou Mbathie (right) and female disciples.

suddenly became the majdhūb. Only occasionally have I witnessed so many 
people  exhibiting  such  powerful  states  (ḥāl)  in  weekly  daayira  meetings, 
although  Sayyida  Zeynabou  had  told  me  before  the  meeting  that  this  was 
what usually happened when she and Aïda Faye share a meeting.

Shortly before midnight, Aïda Faye culminated her chanting with an inter-
pretation of a rousing Mauritanian sikkar as many disciples chanted along. She 
then gave a short speech thanking Baye Niasse (repeating several times ‘jërëjëfee 
Baay Ñas! ’—‘thank you Baye Niasse!’) and apologizing to the neighbors (sev-
eral of whom had been watching attentively from their windows) for the dis-
turbance and the length of the meeting. This was one of the very few times 
I had heard a woman either lead the sikkar or directly address a Taalibe Baay 
meeting. Her gentle, friendly tone sounded less like that of the typical impas-
sioned male orator than that of a gentle young mother. After a short speech 
from the male daayira president, Sayyida Zeynabou gave the closing speech, 
speaking almost inaudibly as a male disciple positioned himself at the edge of 
the women’s section to relay her words through the microphone. The very 
few other women I have heard address Taalibe Baay assemblies have similarly 
spoken  through  an  animator  (jottalikat).  Directly  addressing  my  research 
topic, she discussed how Islamic law (Sharīʿa) introduced the idea of women’s 

Downloaded from Brill.com12/10/2020 08:54:48PM
via University of Florida

396 

J. Hill / Journal of Religion in Africa 40 (2010) 375-412

equality ‘in the visible’ (ci zaahir), and how the deeper reality of Islam abol-
ishes the very distinction between men and women ‘in the hidden’ (ci baatin). 
She then had a male disciple ‘seal’ the meeting by reciting a prayer in Arabic.
Any observer could see that the two leading ﬁgures in this meeting were 
Zeynabou Mbathie and Aïda Faye. The latter was the most powerful voice 
during the chanting, even if her speaking voice was gentle, and was the ﬁrst 
speaker, while the former was the ﬁnal and longest speaker. Several who arrived 
after the meeting had begun made sure to kneel and bow their heads to greet 
her before taking their seats. Yet both women also engaged in many rituals of 
deference  and  self-eﬀacement,  which  ultimately  served  as  indexes  of  piety, 
thereby  enhancing  their  moral  authority.  Throughout  the  meeting,  both 
women navigated in multiple ways between the shown and the hidden, the 
public and the private, society and the domestic sphere, restraint (kersa) and 
assertiveness. Rather than merely steer a middle course, they played up the 
tensions between these opposites, shaping their outward image through behav-
ior that presented itself as inward-looking, restrained, and submissive.

In numerous ways Zeynabou Mbathie demonstrated her submission to her 
husband as master of the house: she asked him both to pray for us visitors 
rather than pray for us herself as a religious ﬁgure normally does for all visitors, 
and then to lead the congregation in prayer and the litanies. On previous visits 
when her husband has been absent, she was always sure to have us greet him 
over her cell phone, fulﬁlling the religious obligation to seek a husband’s con-
sent to talk to other men. However, despite her rituals of submission, she was 
clearly the one delegating, and attendees doubtless perceived his more visible 
position as deriving from her more subdued position. She managed the meet-
ing in other ways while remaining properly enclosed, asking a male disciple to 
pray for the congregation at the end of the meeting and then speaking almost 
inaudibly  through  an  animator.  By  orchestrating  a  highly  visible  meeting 
heard throughout the neighborhood without anyone hearing her voice, she 
demonstrated that restraint is power. Her silent message about empowering 
women through Islam was heard through the animator and seen through the 
meeting as a whole.

Her choice to speak through an animator could only be understood as a 
performance of this notion of silent piety and self-eﬀacement as power and 
nobility. This requires a brief explanation of oratory, gender and status in Sen-
egal. Traditionally in Senegal, a person of high status must always speak with 
restraint (kersa), with neither high volume, speed nor pitch. To address an 
assembly while maintaining restraint, one must speak through an animator of 
lower status, whether by age, class, or birth—often a géwal (praise singer or 
‘griot’)  (Irvine  1989;  Heath  1990;  McLaughlin  1997).  Men  have  typically 

Downloaded from Brill.com12/10/2020 08:54:48PM
via University of Florida

 

J. Hill / Journal of Religion in Africa 40 (2010) 375-412 

397

been the ones delivering the speeches that an animator then transmits pub-
licly, since most speeches are made by the public representatives of a family or 
religious group. Yet the animator’s role is no longer essential to religious ora-
tory. First, a microphone can stand in for an animator, carrying a subdued 
voice to a large audience (Irvine 1974; Heath 1990), although many senior 
male leaders still opt to perform kersa by speaking through an animator. More-
over, the old rules of kersa are often suspended in today’s religious meetings. If 
a high-status Islamic leader speaks with forcefulness and wide dynamic and 
tonal range, a skill some of Baye Niasse’s sons are famous for, this underscores 
not a lack of kersa but the importance of the message.

If men’s kersa sometimes binds them to address a public only through medi-
ators, in religious contexts, women’s kersa more often leads them not to address 
the public at all or to address them in such an indirect way that they appear 
not to be addressing. Just as forms of sartorial covering serve as ‘portable seclu-
sion’ that mediate women’s presence in public spaces while maintaining their 
‘mystery and remoteness’ (Papanek 1971), various kinds of non-sartorial veils 
mediate Taalibe Baay women’s addresses to their publics outside their homes. 
It is important to remember that in many contexts practices of women’s seclu-
sion  and  veiling  have  marked  a  family’s  social  and  economic  distinction 
(Papanek 1971; Tucker 1993; Cooper 1994, 1997b). A certain degree of seclu-
sion and veiling is common among women from clerical households in Sen-
egal, and many disciples understand these practices as ideals for pious women 
even though few practice them. Going further than the handful of women 
I had seen speak quietly and through an animator, when Baye Niasse’s daugh-
ter Ndey Aïda organized a conference in Kaolack in 2010 on women in Islam, 
she remained in her seat as a younger brother read a statement she had written. 
Although one could perceive her as subordinating herself to him by staying in 
the shadows while he represented her publicly, as her jottalikat he was actually 
assuming a less prestigious position. Many muqaddamas directly address small 
groups of disciples in their home but decline to speak outside in larger gather-
ings,  instead  assigning  disciples  or  male  relatives  to  speak  on  their  behalf. 
When I asked them why none of them gave a moral or religious explanation; 
most answered that they were simply uncomfortable speaking in public.

However,  Baye  Niasse  made  a  number  of  statements  suggesting  that  he 
more or less accepted the view, widespread throughout the Muslim world, that 
a  woman’s  voice  is  part  of  her  ʿawra,  or  that  which—like  her  body  (aside 
from her face and hands)—should be veiled from the public. For example, he 
writes  that  while  women  can  be  given  all  the  secrets  of  Suﬁsm  and  that  a 
woman who truly knows God is the same as a man. Yet he also suggests that it 
is more beneﬁcial for women to perform dhikr silently ([Ñas] 1969, 129-31). 

Downloaded from Brill.com12/10/2020 08:54:48PM
via University of Florida

398 

J. Hill / Journal of Religion in Africa 40 (2010) 375-412

Although Baye Niasse did request that girls at his Islamic Institute in Kaolack 
speak at their demonstrations in front of foreign dignitaries,31 the only woman 
I have heard of speaking in a public religious meeting in his presence is his 
daughter  Roqiyata.32  As  a  counterexample,  several  interviewees  described  a 
wife of Baye Niasse who was a gifted sikkarkat but only performed for Baye in 
his bedroom.

When  I  asked  his  daughter  Roqiyata  whether  Baye  Niasse  considered  a 
woman’s voice ʿawra, she said, ‘There are some who say so’, then responded 
with an ambiguous story. While traveling in Sierra Leone with her husband 
(Ma Abdu Niang, a major muqaddam of Baye), she was introduced to a large 
group of people who wanted to convert to Islam. She addressed the gathering 
despite some local clerics’ protests that a woman’s voice was ʿawra. On her 
return, Baye told her that she had done the right thing, because the good deed 
of guiding a group of people into Islam certainly outweighed any sin. While 
to some this story might suggest that women must not speak publicly unless 
some compelling reason outweighs the sin of doing so, Roqiyata Niasse has 
since given dozens of public speeches in Medina Baye and around the world. 
In a movement where personal religious narratives take the form not of per-
sonal  whims  but  of  inexorable  callings,  women  are  increasingly  defending 
their speaking and acting in public as part of a mission. Zeynabou Mbathie 
describes both herself and Aïda Faye as carrying out missions that Baye Niasse 
personally gave them, saying that in matters of God ‘there are no men, there 
are no women’. Another described Baye appearing in a dream and telling her 
to found a daayira and what to name it.

An overwhelming tendency among Taalibe Baay women leaders is to insist 
that a woman’s voice is not ʿawra while acting as if it were, suggesting that 
those who veil their voices do so not as a moral imperative but as a perform-
ance of restrained piety and kersa. Considering Sayyida Zeynabou’s conﬁdence 
and eloquence when speaking inside her house before numerous non-relatives, 
one cannot say that she lacks the conﬁdence to speak publicly or believes that 
a woman’s voice must be concealed as part of her ʿawra. Rather, her conﬁdent 
display of silence and use of male intermediaries to represent her to the public 
served as part of a public performance of a proper Muslim woman’s demure 
piety and withdrawal from worldly aﬀairs. Sayyida Zeynabou thus ampliﬁed 
conventional notions of feminine interiority and submissiveness to heighten 
her spiritual authority and mystique.

Of course, publicly performing submissiveness can augment one’s moral 
authority only if one already has suﬃciently high status that such acts appear 
as optional acts of piety and not as obligatory acts of subservience. Submissive-
ness can exemplify what Bourdieu (1991) calls ‘condescension,’ a disavowal of 

Downloaded from Brill.com12/10/2020 08:54:48PM
via University of Florida

 

J. Hill / Journal of Religion in Africa 40 (2010) 375-412 

399

the very hierarchies from which one beneﬁts in a way that enhances one’s sta-
tus.  The  legendary  models  of  feminine  piety  widely  known  in  Senegal  are 
those of the mothers of saints, who are celebrated for their absolute devotion 
and submission to their husbands. Murids say that the mother of Amadou 
Bamba Mbacké, Maam Jaara Buuso, was asked to hold a wooden beam by her 
husband, who then forgot to tell her to stop holding it and left her standing 
all night in the rain (Augis 2005, 314). Pape Amadi (‘Baye’) Diouf’s popular 
song praising Baye Niasse’s mother Astou Diankha gives little concrete bio-
graphical  information  about  the  holy  woman,  instead  listing  qualities  that 
could describe any pious woman: ‘She never fought and never harmed him 
[Baye] . . . she had no use for sitting around complaining. . . . she never yelled 
or  laughed  out  loud. . . .  Ever  pure  for  her  leader  [husband],  she  never  left 
without permission. . . . May every lady imitate her’ (Diouf 2004). Drawing 
on such models, Zeynabou Mbathie consecrates acts of wifely submission as 
acts  of  piety  before  God,  using  submission  to  God’s  ẓāhir  prescriptions  to 
reveal a contrasting bāṭin truth. To count as pious humility rather than abase-
ment, such acts must be perceived as a choice made by someone who could 
have set herself above everyone else.

When I asked Zeynabou Mbathie to explain why, if women were equal in 
Islam as she insisted, they do not lead prayer, she lowered her voice and said:

You know, in the Fayḍa of Shaykh Ibrahim, if we were to talk about, as they say, the 
‘bāṭin,’ it would be a bit surprising. But we keep the best behavior, in that we follow 
Sharīʿa and take women and place them behind [in prayer]. Because Sharīʿa has placed 
women behind. . . . That’s how we make it [our behavior] beautiful [taaral ], how we 
give it a pleasing form [rafetal ]. But it’s not something that women can’t do [leading 
prayer]. Everything that a man can do, a woman can do too. . . . A woman, if we are 
talking about the true, true, true, true ‘reality’ [ḥaqīqa]—God—truly—a woman can 
be Imam. Because once you’ve gone to the point of hitting your chest and reaching 
God, there is no man or woman there.

Here  Zeynabou  Mbathie  explicitly  describes  adherence  to  Sharīʿa,  God’s 
prescribed laws of correct Islamic practice, as a performance of distinct roles 
that God has commanded despite the fact that distinctions are on a certain 
level  illusory.  This  is  not  to  say  that  gender  roles  are  a  merely  superﬁcial 
performance—like  Adja  Moussoukoro,  Zeynabou  Mbathie  elsewhere 
described such roles as necessary for cultivating piety and society’s function-
ing. Instead, she uses a technique common in Taalibe Baay discourse to main-
tain two apparently contradictory truths simultaneously (Hill 2007a): gender 
distinctions are an apparent (ẓāhir) truth while absolute equality is a hidden 
(bāṭin) truth.33 This opposition and its analogs, such as sharīʿa (God’s law) and 

Downloaded from Brill.com12/10/2020 08:54:48PM
via University of Florida

400 

J. Hill / Journal of Religion in Africa 40 (2010) 375-412

ḥaqīqa (mystical reality), pervades Taalibe Baay orations and routine discus-
sions touching on religious values. While ẓāhir truths are no less true than 
bāṭin truths, their juxtaposition always favors the hidden truth. Thus Zeyna-
bou Mbathie describes gender distinctions—a ẓāhir (apparent) truth—as a 
means to an end but lack of distinction—a bāṭin (hidden) truth—as an end 
in itself.

This juxtaposition of acts of submission and their deeper meaning suggests 
that authority requires not only a pious disposition but also the successful 
performance of a role through which such a disposition takes on meaning. All 
Suﬁ leaders confront the paradox of having to show enough to be recognized 
without  being  perceived  as  ‘showing  oneself’  (wonewu),  ‘lacking  shame/
restraint’  (ñàkk  kersa),  or  being  a  ‘person  of  appearances/the  world’  (nitab 
zaahir). Any deliberate show of piety risks appearing as the opposite of piety 
(Niasse [Ñas] 1998; Soares 2004). Both male and female muqaddams’ author-
ity depends on recognition of their ability to educate disciples about hidden 
(bāṭin) truths, yet those perceived as actively publicizing their access to hidden 
truths  are  regularly  castigated  as  false  Suﬁs.  Many  muqaddams,  male  and 
female,  emphasized  their  own  silence  regarding  their  spiritual  gifts,  saying 
they unexpectedly received an ʾijāza (appointment) but remained silent until 
God  brought  someone  to  them  and  made  their  calling  appear  (  feeñal). 
Muqaddamas  face  this  paradox  doubly,  facing  higher  standards  of  kersa 
and self-eﬀacement than men. Whereas a man might show kersa by not appear-
ing to show himself, a woman will more likely show it by appearing to hide 
herself. The question, then, is not merely how much to show but how to show 
in such a way that denies that one is showing—how to perform an act of 
not showing.

Many  Taalibe  Baay  muqaddamas  approach  this  paradox  as  a  potential 
advantage.  Mobilizing  the  consonance  between  the  hidden  nature  of  Suﬁ 
knowledge and the interior dispositions of the pious woman can be an alchem-
ical act consecrating a self-eﬀacing and submissive woman as an icon of Suﬁ 
knowledge and authority. Moreover, as Adja Moussoukoro’s remarks in the 
introduction show, equating spiritual guidance with motherhood can natural-
ize women’s leadership in terms of spiritual birth and nurturing. Adja Mous-
soukoro  contrasts  women  leaders’  nurturing  disposition  to  some  men’s 
tendency to neglect disciples’ spiritual progress after tarbiya, which is like ‘giv-
ing birth and throwing away’ the child (‘jur rekk sànni’). Women’s great power, 
she  says,  derives  from  their  ability  to  shape  others  into  moral  or  immoral 
beings: ‘One good woman can make a thousand men; a bad woman can ruin 
a  thousand  men’.34  Adja  Moussoukoro’s  equation  of  the  domestic  space  of 
birth and nurturing and mystical education is not a mere ﬁgure of speech. 

Downloaded from Brill.com12/10/2020 08:54:48PM
via University of Florida

 

J. Hill / Journal of Religion in Africa 40 (2010) 375-412 

401

Mothers with parenting experience easily transition to guiding young people 
from  within  their  domestic  space,  and  many  prominent  male  muqaddams 
regularly refer disciples to them for tarbiya.

Disciples commonly refer to muqaddamas and other esteemed women by 
the title meer bi (the mother, from French), suggesting both aﬀection and ﬁlial 
respect. Even the most formidable woman leader of the Fayḍa, Shaykha Mar-
ième, the only one known in formal settings as Shaykha, is most commonly 
called  Yaay-bóoy  (Mommy)  or,  for  additional  respect,  Sayyida  Yaay-bóoy 
(Lady Mommy). Rather than bristle at their inability to transcend the mater-
nal  role,  muqaddamas  generally  welcome  this  association,  assimilating  new 
spiritual leadership roles with the leadership roles women have always had. 
Although they perform tasks typically reserved for men, muqaddamas do not 
act as if obtaining power requires breaking into a male sphere or transferring 
power from men to women. Instead, they approach power and inﬂuence as 
something inherent, although perhaps latent and hidden, in their God-given 
roles as women (Altorki 1977; Barnes 1990).

Conclusion

I have not attempted to evaluate whether Taalibe Baay muqaddamas are eﬀec-
tively resisting the structures of patriarchal domination, a question that most 
of these women would surely ﬁnd meaningless. This is not because they con-
sider liberal notions of equality to be foreign impositions—indeed, many use 
liberal language to debunk claims that Islam oppresses women and to describe 
Islam as the true path to women’s liberation. Despite speaking of gender equal-
ity and liberation, none hinted at overthrowing patriarchal structures or tak-
ing power for women. Rather, they depicted power and authority as things 
that God has given women as well as men. The question was how to cultivate, 
present, and exercise it.

Although religious authority aﬀects each woman diﬀerently, it is still pos-
sible to make a few observations about the implications of women’s religious 
authority  for  the  muqaddamas  themselves  and  their  disciples.  A  glass-half-
empty  argument  might  point  out  that  appointing  women  as  muqaddamas 
does not reﬂect women’s promotion to previously male roles as much as the 
creation of a new category of leader—male or female—needed by the central 
(largely male) leadership to initiate large numbers of youth and to act as coun-
selors to these youth’s daayiras. This might imply a devaluation of the title 
‘muqaddam’ accompanying the popularization of Suﬁ knowledge, while the 
role of what colonialists called ‘grands marabouts,’ who act as political brokers 

Downloaded from Brill.com12/10/2020 08:54:48PM
via University of Florida

402 

J. Hill / Journal of Religion in Africa 40 (2010) 375-412

between disciples and state authorities (Villalón 1995; Robinson 2000), has 
almost always remained a male role. Indeed, many Taalibe Baay shrugged oﬀ 
talk of muqaddamas, saying that anyone can be a muqaddam these days and 
that only an elite few—generally highly literate men closely connected to Baye 
Niasse—really  mattered.  Furthermore,  although  muqaddamas  frequently 
speak of equality and liberation, they most often prescribe a more or less patri-
archal practice of Islam as the best way to bring such goals about. They do not 
oppose men being the head of the house—every car must have one driver, the 
say,  and  every  country  one  president.  The  married  majority  went  to  great 
lengths to demonstrate their devotion to serving their husbands.

However, their description of bāṭin realities behind these ẓāhir appearances 
must not be dismissed as mere mystiﬁcations. Just as the community agrees on 
who bears the title of Khalīfa even as other leaders often exercise considerably 
more inﬂuence than the Khalīfa, muqaddamas acknowledge their husband as 
the household head even though most are far better known and more inﬂuen-
tial outside the household than their husbands. A woman’s social capital out-
side  the  household  cannot  fail  to  aﬀect  a  muqaddama’s  status  within  the 
household.  One  muqaddama,  whose  husband  was  later  appointed  as  a 
muqaddam, is a high-ranking member of the Fédération Ansarou Dine encom-
passing all Dakar Taalibe Baay daayiras. While she makes sure she performs 
the requisite rites of wifely submission, it is no secret that she is far more inﬂu-
ential in the Fayḍa than he is, a fact that does not seem to bother him. In 
short, Sayyida Zeynabou Mbathie’s suggestion that women’s wifely submis-
sion is a performance—a true and socially necessary performance, but one 
that contrasts with a deeper truth—is consistent with many powerful women’s 
self presentation.

At times Taalibe Baay women seem to ‘bargain with patriarchy’ (Kandiyoti 
1988), maneuvering from a position of relative weakness within a given set of 
constraints. Wifely submission is not a mere act but can require signiﬁcant 
compromises. However, in certain circumstances, acts of submission and self-
eﬀacement can bolster moral authority. Muqaddamas use established gender 
norms to reverse the hierarchies these norms often uphold, accentuating the 
equivalence between submission and ‘Islam’ (submission in Arabic), interior-
ity and hidden knowledge and motherhood and spiritual leadership. Partly 
because most of them have been appointed by and depend on male leaders, 
muqaddamas do not openly challenge the overwhelmingly male-dominated 
Islamic  institutions.  Yet  like  male  muqaddams  I  interviewed,  many  trace 
spiritual knowledge and legitimacy partly to otherworldly sources, whether 
jinne, visions of Baye, or dreams. Several—for example, Zeynabou Mbathie 
and another woman in Medina Baye who called her neighbors to come wit-
ness Baye’s appearance in her bedroom—were appointed after reporting such 

Downloaded from Brill.com12/10/2020 08:54:48PM
via University of Florida

 

J. Hill / Journal of Religion in Africa 40 (2010) 375-412 

403

miracles.  These  sources  provide  alternative  narratives  of  religious  authority 
that only partially depend on the movement’s hierarchy.

By  naturalizing  ‘women’s  liberation’  and  ‘equality’  as  the  application  of 
uncontroversial Islamic principles, Taalibe Baay muqaddamas join a diverse 
group of voices presenting Islam and its foundational texts and practices as 
fundamentally feminist (see, for example, Wadud 1993; al-Hibri 1997, 2000; 
Ali 2003, 2006; Badran 2005). These women refract both liberal and Islamic 
traditions through their hybridized conceptions of equality and piety, experi-
menting with new ways of thinking about and modeling liberation in Islamic 
and Suﬁ terms.

Acknowledgments

This article would not have been possible without the help of Alioune Seck, Cheikh Baye 
Thiam,  Abdoulaye  Niang,  El-Hadj  Abdoulaye  Bitèye  and  other  Medina  Baye  Research 
Association members. Thanks to Thomas Gibson, Emil Homerin, Anthea Butler, Ruediger 
Seesemann, Richard Payne, Andrew Conroe, and Omolade Adunbe, Mark Westmoreland, 
John Schaefer, Amy Holmes, Agnes Czajka, Marwa Ali Sabbah, Sarah Michelle Leonard, 
Adeline  Masquelier  and  many  others  for  their  comments.  Many  thanks  to  Kamari  M. 
Clarke, Joseph Errington, Eric Worby, and Leonardo Villalón for their insights and sup-
port. Stages of this research were funded by Fulbright-Hays Doctoral Dissertation Research 
Abroad and Social Science Research Council International Dissertation Research Fellow-
ship grants. Its writing was supported by fellowships at the University of Rochester’s Fred-
erick  Douglass  Institute  for  African  and  African-American  Studies  and  the  American 
University in Cairo. Above all, thanks to all the Taalibe Baay women and men who so 
generously shared their stories with me and my collaborators.

References

Abu-Lughod, Lila. 1998. ‘Introduction: Feminist Longings and Postcolonial Conditions’. 
In Lila Abu-Lughod (ed.), Remaking Women: Feminism and Modernity in the Middle 
East. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 3-31.

———.  2002. ‘Do Muslim Women Really Need Saving? Anthropological Reﬂections on 

Cultural Relativism and its Others’. American Anthropologist 104.3, 783-90.

al-Hibri, Azizah. 1997. ‘Islam, Law and Custom: Redeﬁning Muslim Women’s Rights’. 

American University Journal of International Law & Policy 12, 1.

———.  2000. ‘An Introduction to Muslim Women’s Rights’. In Gisela Webb (ed.), Win-
dows of Faith: Muslim Women Scholar-Activists in North America. Syracuse: Syracuse 
University Press, 51-71.

Ali, Kecia. 2003. ‘Progressive Muslims and Islamic Jurisprudence: The Necessity for Criti-
cal Engagement with Marriage and Divorce Law’. In Omid Saﬁ (ed.), Progressive Mus-
lims on Justice, Gender and Pluralism. Oxford: Oneworld, 163-189.

———.  2006. Sexual Ethics and Islam: Feminist Reﬂections on Qur’an, Hadith, and Juris-

prudence. Oxford: Oneworld.

Downloaded from Brill.com12/10/2020 08:54:48PM
via University of Florida

404 

J. Hill / Journal of Religion in Africa 40 (2010) 375-412

Altorki, Soraya. 1977. ‘Family Organization and Women’s Power in Urban Saudi Arabian 

Society’. Journal of Anthropological Research 33.3, 277-287, doi: 10.2307/3630009.

Asad, Talal. 1993. Genealogies of Religion: Discipline and Reasons of Power in Christianity and 

Islam. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

———.  2000. ‘Remarks on the Anthropology of the Body’. In Sarah Coakley (ed.), Reli-

gion and the Body. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Asad, Talal and Scott, David. 2006. ‘The Trouble of Thinking: An Interview with Talal 
Asad’. In Charles Hirschkind and David Scott (eds.), Powers of the Secular Modern: 
Talal  Asad  and  His  Interlocutors.  Stanford:  Stanford  University  Press,  1st  ed.,  243-
304.

Augis, Erin. 2005. ‘Dakar’s Sunnite Women: The Politics of Person’. In Muriel Gomez-
Perez  (ed.),  L’islam  politique  au  sud  du  Sahara:  Identités,  discours  et  enjeux.  Paris: 
Karthala, 309-326.

———.  2009.  ‘Jambaar  or  Jumbax-out?  How  Sunnite  Women  Negotiate  Power  and 
Belief in Orthodox Islamic Femininity’. In Mamadou Diouf and Mara A. Leichtman 
(eds.), New Perspectives on Islam in Senegal: Conversion, Migration, Wealth, Power, and 
Femininity. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 211-233.

Austin,  John  L.  1962.  How  to  do  Things  with  Words.  Cambridge:  Harvard  University 

Badran, Margot. 2005. ‘Between Secular and Islamic Feminism/s’. Journal of Middle East 

Press.

Women’s Studies 1.1, 6-28.

Bakhtin, Mikhail. 1981. ‘Discourse in the Novel’. In Michael Holquist (ed.), The Dialogic 

Imagination: Four Essays. Austin: University of Texas Press, 259-422.

Barnes, Sandra T. 1990. ‘Women, Property, and Power’. In Peggy Reeves Sanday and Ruth 
Gallagher Goodenough (eds.), Beyond the Second Sex: New Directions in the Anthropol-
ogy of Gender. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 255-80.

Bava,  Sophie.  2000.  ‘Reconversions  et  nouveaux  mondes  commerciaux  des  mourides  à 

Marseille’. Hommes et migrations 46-55.

Beck, Linda J. 2003. ‘Democratization and the Hidden Public: The Impact of Patronage 

Networks on Senegalese Women’. Comparative Politics 35.2, 147-169.

Behrman, Lucy C. 1970. Muslim Brotherhoods and Politics in Senegal. Cambridge: Harvard 

University Press.

Press.

Boddy, Janice. 1989. Wombs and Alien Spirits: Women, Men, and the Zār Cult in Northern 

Sudan. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.

Bourdieu, Pierre. 1977. Outline of a Theory of Practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University 

———.  1991. Language and Symbolic Power. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Boyd, Jean. 1989. The Caliph’s Sister: Nana Asma’u, 1793-1865, Teacher, Poet, and Islamic 

Leader. London: Frank Cass.

Boyd, Jean and Last, Murray. 1985. ‘The Role of Women as “Agents Religieux” in Sokoto’. 
Canadian  Journal  of  African  Studies  /  Revue  Canadienne  des  Études  Africaines  19.2, 
283-300.

Buggenhagen, Beth Anne. 2001. ‘Prophets and Proﬁts: Gendered and Generational Visions 
of Wealth and Value in Senegalese Murid Households’. Journal of Religion in Africa 
31.4, 373-401.

———.  2004. ‘Domestic Object(ions): The Senegalese Murid Trade Diaspora and the 
Politics of Marriage Payments, Love, and State Privatization’. In Brad Weiss (ed.), 
Producing African Futures: Ritual and Reproduction in a Neoliberal Age. Leiden: Brill, 
21-53.

Downloaded from Brill.com12/10/2020 08:54:48PM
via University of Florida

 

J. Hill / Journal of Religion in Africa 40 (2010) 375-412 

405

Press.

———.  2008. ‘Global Circuits of Senegalese Muslims and Women’s Search for Religious 
Merit’. Paper presented at the conference Tolerance, Democracy, and Suﬁs in Senegal, 
March 7, Columbia University.

———.  2009a. ‘Beyond Brotherhood: Gender, Religious Authority, and the Global Cir-
cuits of Senegalese Muridiyya’. In Mamadou Diouf and Mara A. Leichtman (eds.), 
New Perspectives on Islam in Senegal: Conversion, Migration, Wealth, Power, and Femi-
ninity. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 189-210.

———.  2009b. ‘Picturing Women’s Worth: Muslim Visual Cultures and the Image Econ-
omy in Global Senegal’. Paper presented at the American Anthropological Association 
Annual Meeting, December 4, Philadelphia.

Certeau, Michel de. 1984. The Practice of Everyday Life. Berkeley: University of California 

Cifuentes, Frédérique. 2008. ‘Suﬁ Sheikhs, Sheikhas, and Saints of the Sudan’. (G.A.W. 
Morgan  and  E.H.  Morgan,  trans.)  African  Arts  41.2,  50-59,  doi:  10.1162/afar.
2008.41.2.50.

Cooper,  Barbara  M.  1994.  ‘Reﬂections  on  Slavery,  Seclusion  and  Female  Labor  in  the 
Maradi Region of Niger in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries’. The Journal of 
African History 35.1, 61-78.

———.  1997a. ‘Gender, Movement, and History: Social and Spatial Transformations in 
20th Century Maradi, Niger’. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 15, 
195-222.

———.  1997b.  Marriage  in  Maradi:  Gender  and  Culture  in  a  Hausa  Society  in  Niger, 

1900-1989. Oxford: James Currey.

Copans, Jean. 1980. Les marabouts de l’arachide: la confrérie mouride et les paysans du Séné-

gal. Paris: Sycomore.

tions Pedone.

Coulon, Christian. 1981. Le marabout et le prince: Islam et pouvoir au Sénégal. Paris: Edi-

———.  1988. ‘Women, Islam, and Baraka’. In Donal B. Cruise O’Brien and Christian 
Coulon (eds.), Charisma and Brotherhood in African Islam. Oxford: Clarendon, 113-
133.

Coulon, Christian and Reveyrand, Odile. 1990. L’Islam au féminin: Sokhna Magat Diop, 
cheikh de la confrérie mouride, Sénégal. Talence: Centre d’étude d’Afrique noire, Insti-
tut d’études politiques de Bordeaux.

Creevey, Lucy. 1996. ‘Islam, Women and the Role of the State in Senegal’. Journal of Reli-

gion in Africa 26, 268-307.

Cruise O’Brien, Donal B. 1971. The Mourides of Senegal: the Political and Economic Organ-

ization of an Islamic Brotherhood. Oxford: Clarendon.

———.  1996.  ‘Review:  The  Senegalese  Exception’.  Africa:  Journal  of  the  International 

Deeb, Lara. 2006. An Enchanted Modern: Gender and Public Piety in Shi’i Lebanon. Prince-

African Institute 66.3, 458-464.

ton: Princeton University Press.

———.  2009. ‘Piety Politics and the Role of a Transnational Feminist Analysis’. Journal of 
the  Royal  Anthropological  Institute  15,  S112-S126,  doi:  10.1111/j.1467-9655.
2009.01545.x.

Diouf, Amadi. 2004. Mame Astou Diankha Yayou Baye. Audio cassette recording. Dakar.
Evers Rosander, Eva. 1997. ‘Le dahira de Mam Diarra Bousso à Mbacké: Analyse d’une 
association religieuse de femmes sénégalaises’. In Eva Evers Rosander (ed.), Transfor-
mation des identités féminines: Formes d’organisations féminines en Afrique de l’Ouest. 
Uppsala: Nordic Africa Institute, 161-174.

Downloaded from Brill.com12/10/2020 08:54:48PM
via University of Florida

406 

J. Hill / Journal of Religion in Africa 40 (2010) 375-412

———.  1998.  ‘Women’s  Religious  Practice  in  Senegal:  The  case  of  the  Mam  Diarra 
Bousso  Daira  in  Mbacke’.  In  Karin  Ask  and  Marit Tjomsland  (eds.),  Women  and 
Islamization: Contemporary Dimensions of Discourse on Gender Relations. Oxford: Berg, 
199.

———.  2003. ‘Mam Diarra Bousso: The Mourid-mother of Porokhane, Senegal’. Jenda: 

A Journal of Culture and African Women Studies 4, 1-12.

———.  2004. ‘Going and Not Going to Porokhane: Mouride Women and Pilgrimage in 
Senegal and Spain’. In Simon Coleman and John Eade (eds.), Reframing Pilgrimage: 
Cultures in Motion. London: Routledge, 67-90.

Foucault, Michel. 1997a. ‘Technologies of the Self’. In Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth. New 

———.  1997b. ‘The Hermeneutic of the Subject’. In Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth. New 

———.  1997c. ‘Subjectivity and Truth’. In Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth. New York: New 

York: New Press, 223-51.

York: New Press, 87-93.

Press, 87-92.

Gilmore, David D. 1996. ‘Above and Below: Toward a Social Geometry of Gender’. Amer-

ican Anthropologist, New Series 98.1, 54-66.

Goﬀman, Erving. 1981. ‘Footing’. In Forms of Talk. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylva-

nia Press, 124-159.

Gomez-Perez,  Muriel.  1998.  ‘Associations  islamiques  à  Dakar’.  In  Ousmane  Kane  and 
Jean-Louis Triaud (eds.), Islam et islamismes au sud du Sahara. Paris: Karthala, 137-
154.

Gomez-Perez,  Muriel,  LeBlanc,  Marie-Nathalie  and  Savadogo,  Mathias.  2009.  ‘Young 
Men and Islam in the 1990s: Rethinking an Intergenerational Perspective’. Journal of 
Religion in Africa 39, 186-218, doi: 10.1163/157006609X436021.

Gray, Christopher. 1998. ‘The Rise of the Niassene Tijaniyya, 1875 to the Present’. In 
Ousmane Kane and Jean-Louis Triaud (eds.), Islam et islamismes au sud su Sahara. 
Paris: Karthala, 59-82.

Heath, Deborah. 1990. ‘Spatial Politics and Verbal Performance in Urban Senegal’. Ethnol-

ogy 29.3, 209-223.

Hill,  Joseph.  2007a.  Divine  Knowledge  and  Islamic  Authority:  Religious  Specialization 

among Disciples of Baay Ñas. Ph.D. Dissertation, Yale University.

———.  2007b. ‘Mystical Specialists, Institutional Specialists, and the Construction of an 
Urban  Suﬁ  Movement  in  Senegal’.  presented  at  the  African  Studies  Association 
Annual Meeting, October 21, New York presented at the African Studies Association 
Annual Meeting.

Hirschkind, Charles. 2001. ‘The Ethics of Listening: Cassette-Sermon Audition in Con-

temporary Egypt’. American Ethnologist 28.3, 623-49.

Hirschkind,  Charles  and  Mahmood,  Saba.  2002.  ‘Feminism,  the  Taliban,  and  Politics 
of  Counter-Insurgency’.  Anthropological  Quarterly  75.2,  339-354,  doi:  10.2307/
3318265.

Hirschon, Renée. 1981. ‘Essential Objects and the Sacred: Interior and Exterior Space in 
an Urban Greek Locality’. In Shirley Ardener (ed.), Women and Space: Ground Rules 
and Social Maps. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 72-88.

Hiskett, Mervyn. 1980. ‘The “Community of Grace” and Its Opponents, “the Rejecters”: 
A Debate about Theology and Mysticism in Muslim West Africa with Special Refer-
ence to its Hausa Expression’. African Language Studies 17, 99-140.

Downloaded from Brill.com12/10/2020 08:54:48PM
via University of Florida

 

J. Hill / Journal of Religion in Africa 40 (2010) 375-412 

407

Hutson, Alaine S. 1999. ‘The Development of Women’s Authority in the Kano Tijaniyya, 

1894-1963’. Africa Today 46.3, 43-64.

———.  2001.  ‘Women,  Men,  and  Patriarchal  Bargaining  in  an  Islamic  Suﬁ  Order: 
The Tijaniyya in Kano, Nigeria, 1937 to the Present’. Gender and Society 15.5, 734-
753.

———.  2004. ‘African Suﬁ Women and Ritual Change’. Journal of Ritual Studies 18.2, 

Irvine, Judith T. 1974. Caste and Communication in a Wolof Village. Ph.D. Dissertation, 

61-73.

University of Pennsylvania.

———.  1989. ‘Strategies of Status Manipulation in the Wolof Greeting’. In Richard Bau-
man and Joel Sherzer (eds.), Explorations in the Ethnography of Speaking. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2nd ed., 167-91.

———.  1995. ‘A Sociolinguistic Approach to Emotion Concepts in a Senegalese Com-
munity’. In James A. Russell, José-Miguel Fernández-Dols, Antony S.R. Manstead, 
and J.C. Wellencamp (eds.), Everyday Conceptions of Emotion: An Introduction to the 
Psychology, Anthropology and Linguistics of Emotion. Dortrecht: Kluwer, 251-265.

Janson,  Marloes.  2005.  ‘Roaming  About  For  God’s  Sake:  The  Upsurge  of  the Tabligh 
Jama’at  in  the  Gambia’.  Journal  of  Religion  in  Africa  35,  450-481,  doi:  10.1163/
157006605774832199.

———.  2006. ‘ ‘‘We Are All the Same, Because We All Worship God”: The Controversial 
Case of a Female Saint in the Gambia’. Africa: Journal of the International African 
Institute 76.4, 502-525.

———.  2007. ‘Appropriating Islam: The Tensions between “Traditionalists” and “Mod-

ernists” in The Gambia’. Islam et sociétés au sud du Sahara 1, 61-79.

———.  2008. ‘Renegotiating Gender: Changing Moral Practice in the Tablīghī Jamāʿat 

in The Gambia’. Journal for Islamic Studies 28, 9-36.

Kandiyoti, Deniz. 1988. ‘Bargaining with Patriarchy’. Gender and Society 2.3, 274-290.
Kane, Ousmane. 2003. Muslim Modernity in Postcolonial Nigeria: A Study of the Society for 

the Removal of Innovation and Restatement of Tradition. Leiden: Brill.

Kane, Ousmane and Villalón, Leonardo A. 1998. ‘Entre confrérisme, réformisme et isla-
misme  :  Les  mustarshidin  du  Sénégal’.  In  Ousmane  Kane  and  Jean-Louis Triaud 
(eds.), Islam et Islamismes au sud du Sahara. Paris: Karthala, 263-310.

Katz,  Cindi.  1993.  ‘Growing  Girls/Closing  Circles:  Limits  on  the  Spaces  of  Knowing 
in  Rural  Sudan  and  US  Cities’.  In  Cindi  Katz  and  Janice  J.  Monk  (eds.),  Full 
circles: geographies of women over the life course. London and New York: Routledge, 
88-106.

Kenyon, Susan M. 1995. ‘Zar as Modernization in Contemporary Sudan’. Anthropological 

Quarterly 68.2, 107-120, doi: 10.2307/3318050.

———.  2007. ‘ ‘‘Moveable Feast of Signs”: Gender in Zar in Central Sudan”. Material 

Religion 3.1, 62-75.

Klenk, Rebecca M. 2004. ‘ ‘‘Who is the Developed Woman?”: Women as a Category of 
Development Discourse, Kumaon, India’. Development and Change 35.1, 57-78, doi: 
10.1111/j.1467-7660.2004.00342.x.

Lambek, Michael. 1981. Human Spirits: A Cultural Account of Trance in Mayotte. Cam-

Laqueur, Thomas Walter. 1990. Making Sex: Body and Gender from the Greeks to Freud. 

bridge: Cambridge University Press.

Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Downloaded from Brill.com12/10/2020 08:54:48PM
via University of Florida

408 

J. Hill / Journal of Religion in Africa 40 (2010) 375-412

Launay, Robert. 1992. Beyond the Stream: Islam and Society in a West African Town. Berke-

Lewis, I. M. 1989. Ecstatic Religion: A Study of Shamanism and Spirit Possession. London: 

ley: University of California Press.

Routledge, 2nd ed.

Loimeier, Roman. 1994. ‘Cheikh Touré: du reformisme à l’islamisme, un musulman séné-

galais dans le siècle’. Islam et Sociétés au Sud du Sahara 8, 55-66.

———.  1996. ‘The Secular State and Islam in Senegal’. In David Westerlund (ed.), Ques-
tioning  the  Secular  State:  The Worldwide  Resurgence  of  Religion  in  Politics.  London: 
Hurst, 183-197.

———.  1997. Islamic Reform and Political Change in Northern Nigeria. Evanston: North-

western University Press.

———.  2000. ‘L’Islam ne se vend plus: The Islamic Reform Movement and the State in 

Senegal’. Journal of Religion in Africa 30.2, 168-190.

———.  2003. ‘Patterns and Peculiarities of Islamic Reform in Africa’. Journal of Religion 

in Africa 33.3, 237-262, doi: 10.2307/1581849.

Mack, Beverly. 2008. ‘Muslim Women Scholars in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centu-
ries: Morocco to Nigeria’. In Shamil Jeppie and Souleymane Bachir Diagne (eds.), The 
Meanings  of  Timbuktu.  Cape  Town:  Human  Sciences  Research  Council  of  South 
Africa Press and CODESRIA, 165-180.

Mahmood,  Saba.  2001a.  ‘Feminist  Theory,  Embodiment,  and  the  Docile  Agent:  Some 

Reﬂections on the Egyptian Islamic Revival’. Cultural Anthropology 16.2, 202-36.

———.  2001b. ‘Rehearsed Spontaneity and the Conventionality of Ritual: Disciplines of 

“Ṣalāt”’. American Ethnologist 28.4, 827-853, doi: 10.2307/3094937.

———.  2005. Politics of Piety: The Islamic Revival and the Feminist Subject. Princeton: 

Princeton University Press.

Masquelier, Adeline. 1999. ‘Debating Muslims, Disputed Practices: Struggles for the Real-
ization  of  an  Alternative  Moral  Order  in  Niger’.  In  John  L.  Comaroﬀ  and  Jean 
Comaroﬀ (eds.), Civil Society and the Political Imagination in Africa: Critical Perspec-
tives. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 219-50.

———.  2001. Prayer Has Spoiled Everything: Possession, Power, and Identity in an Islamic 

Town of Niger. Durham: Duke University Press.

———.  2009. Women and Islamic Revival in a West African Town. Bloomington: Indiana 

McLaughlin, Fiona. 1997. ‘Islam and Popular Music in Senegal: The Emergence of a “New 

University Press.

Tradition’’ ’. Africa 67.4, 560-581.

Monteil, Vincent. 1980. L’Islam noir: une religion à la conquête de l’Afrique. Paris: Seuil.
Morris, Rosalind C. 1995. ‘All Made Up: Performance Theory and the New Anthropology 

of Sex and Gender’. Annual Review of Anthropology 24, 567-592.

Mustafa, Hudita Nura. 2001. ‘Ruins and Spectacles: Fashion and City Life in Contempo-

rary Senegal’. Nka: Journal of Contemporary African Art 15, 47-53.

———.  2006. ‘Eros, Beauty and Crisis: Notes from Senegal’. Feminist Africa 6, 20-32.
Ñas, ʾAbū Bakr ibn al-Ḥājj ʿAbd Allāh (Sëriñ Mbay).‘Alladhīna dakhalū fī l-Fayḍah ʾawwalan 
wa nālū murādahum, ʿām 1348 [Those who ﬁrst entered the Fayḍah and were granted 
what they sought in the year 1348/1929-1930]’.

[Ñas],  Ash-Shaykh  Ibrāhīm  ibn  ash-Shaykh  ʿAbd  Allāh.  1969.  Jawāhir  ar-rasāʾil.  (Ash-

Shaykh ʾAḥmad ʾAbū Fatḥ Al-Yarwāwī, ed.). n.p.

Niasse [Ñas], Shaykh Ibrahim. 1998. Spirit of Good Morals [Rūḥ al-ʾAdab]. (Alh. Abdul 
Hakim Halim, ed., Shaykh Hassan Cisse, tran.). Kaolack: African American Islamic 
Institute, Retrieved from http://home.earthlink.net/~halimcisse/id6.html.

Downloaded from Brill.com12/10/2020 08:54:48PM
via University of Florida

 

J. Hill / Journal of Religion in Africa 40 (2010) 375-412 

409

Niyās [Ñas], Ash-Shaykh Ibrāhīm ibn al-Ḥājj ʿAbd Allāh. 1993a. ‘Nafaḥāt al-malak al-ghanī 
fī s-siyāḥati fī ʾarḍi Bamaku wa-Ghinī (Ar-riḥlah al-Kunākriyyah) [Gifts of the wealthy 
king, on traveling to the land of Bamako and Guinea (The journey to Conakry)]’. In 
Muḥammad  al-Maʾmūn  ʾIbrāhīm  Niyās  [Ñas]  (ed.),  Majmūʿ  riḥlāt  ash-Shaykh 
ʾIbrāhīm [Collected travels of Shaykh Ibrahim]. Cairo: n.p., 103-119.

———.  1993b. ‘Ar-riḥlah al-Kannāriyyah wa-l-Kumāshiyyah [Journey to Mauritania and 
Kumasi]’. In Muḥammad al-Maʾmūn ʾIbrāhīm Niyās [Ñas] (ed.), Majmūʿ riḥlāt ash-
Shaykh ʾIbrāhīm [Collected travels of Shaykh Ibrahim]. Cairo: n.p., 71-101.

Paden, John N. 1973. Religion and Political Culture in Kano. Berkeley: University of Cali-

fornia Press.

Papanek,  Hanna.  1971.  ‘Purdah  in  Pakistan:  Seclusion  and  Modern  Occupations  for 

Women’. Journal of Marriage and Family 33.3, 517-530.

Peirce, Charles Sanders. 1955. ‘Logic as Semiotic: The Theory of Signs’. In Justus Buchler 

(ed.), Philosophical Writings of Pierce. New York: Dover, 98-119.

Perry, Donna L. 2005. ‘Wolof Women, Economic Liberalization, and the Crisis of Mascu-

linity in Rural Senegal’. Ethnology 44.3, 207-226.

———.  2009.  ‘Fathers,  Sons,  and  the  State:  Discipline  and  Punishment  in  a  Wolof 
Hinterland’.  Cultural  Anthropology  24.1,  33-67,  doi:  10.1111/j.1548-1360.
2009.00026.x.

Rasmussen, Susan J. 1995. Spirit Possession and Personhood Among the Kel Ewey Tuareg. 

Rathgeber, Eva M. 1990. ‘WID, WAD, GAD: Trends in Research and Practice’. The Jour-

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

nal of Developing Areas 24.4, 489-502.

Razavi, Shahrashoub and Miller, Carol. 1995. ‘From Wid to Gad: Conceptual Shifts in the 
Women and Development Discourse’. Occasional paper, United Nations Research Insti-
tute for Social Development/ United Nations Development Programme 1.

Renders, Marleen. 2002. ‘An Ambiguous Adventure: Muslim Organisations and the Dis-

course of “Development” in Senegal’. Journal of religion in Africa 32.1, 61-81.

République du Sénégal. 2002. Recensement général de la Population et de I’Habitat. Dakar: 

Agence Nationale de la Statistique et de la Demographie du Sénégal.

Roberts, Allen F. and Roberts, Mary Nooter. 2000. ‘ ‘‘Paintings like Prayers”: The Hidden Side 
of Senegalese Reverse-Glass “Image/Texts’’ ’. Research in African Literatures 31.4, 76-96.
———.  2002.  ‘A  Saint  in  the  City:  Suﬁ  Arts  of  Urban  Senegal  (Exhibition  Preview)’. 

African Arts 35, 52-95.

Robinson,  David.  2000.  Paths  of  Accommodation:  Muslim  Societies  and  French  Colonial 

Authorities in Senegal and Mauritania, 1880-1920. Oxford: James Currey.

Ṣamb [Sàmb], ʿĀmir [Amar]. 1979. Al-ʾAdab as-Sinighāliyy al-ʿArabiyy [Senegalese Arabic 

Literature]. Algiers: Ash-sharikah al-waṭaniyyah li-n-nashri wa-t-tawzīʿ, Vol. 2.

Schimmel, Annemarie. 2003. My Soul is a Woman: The Feminine in Islam. (Susan H. Ray, 

tran.). New York: Continuum.

Schulz, Dorothea E. 2003. ‘ ‘‘Charisma and Brotherhood” Revisited: Mass-mediated Forms 

of Spirituality in Urban Mali’. Journal of Religion in Africa 33.2, 146-171.

———.  2006.  ‘Promises  of  (Im)mediate  Salvation:  Islam,  Broadcast  Media,  and  the 

Remaking of Religious Experience in Mali’. American Ethnologist 33.2, 210-229.

———.  2008.  ‘(Re)Turning  to  Proper  Muslim  Practice:  Islamic  Moral  Renewal  and 
Women’s Conﬂicting Assertions of Sunni Identity in Urban Mali’. Africa Today 54.4, 
20-43, doi: Article.

Scott,  James  C.  1987.  Weapons  of  the Weak:  Everyday  Forms  of  Peasant  Resistance.  New 

Haven: Yale University Press.

Downloaded from Brill.com12/10/2020 08:54:48PM
via University of Florida

410 

J. Hill / Journal of Religion in Africa 40 (2010) 375-412

Seesemann, Rüdiger. 2000. ‘The History of the Tijâniya and the Issue of Tarbiya in Darfur’. 
In Jean-Louis Triaud and David Robinson (eds.), La Tijâniyya: Une confrérie musul-
mane à la conquête de l’Afrique. Paris: Karthala, 393-437.

———.  2004. ‘The Shurafaʾ and the “Blacksmith”: The Role of the Idaw ʿAli of Maurita-
nia in the Career of the Senegalese Shaykh Ibrahim Niasse (1900-1975)’. In Scott S. 
Reese (ed.), The Transmission of Learning in Islamic Africa. Leiden: Brill, 72-98.

———.  Forthcoming. The Divine Flood: Ibrahim Niasse (1900-1975) and the Roots of a 

Twentieth-Century Suﬁ Revival. New York: Oxford University Press.

Soares, Benjamin F. 2004. ‘Islam and Public Piety in Mali’. In Armando Salvatore and Dale 

F. Eickelman (eds.), Public Islam and the Common Good. Leiden: Brill, 205-226.

Starrett, Gregory. 1995. ‘The Hexis of Interpretation: Islam and the body in the Egyptian 

popular school’. American Ethnologist 22, 953-69.

———.  1998. Putting Islam to Work: Education, Politics, and Religious Transformation in 

Egypt. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Strobel, Margaret. 1979. Muslim women in Mombasa, 1890-1975. New Haven: Yale Uni-

versity Press.

Sule,  Balaraba  B.M.  and  Starratt,  Priscilla  E.  1991.  ‘Islamic  Leadership  Positions  for 
Women in Contemporary Kano Society’. In Catherine Coles and Beverly Mack (eds.), 
Hausa Women  in  the  Twentieth  Century.  Madison:  University  of  Wisconsin  Press, 
29-49.

Tucker, Judith E. 1993. ‘The Arab Family in History: “Otherness” and the Study of the 
Family’.  In  Judith  E.  Tucker  (ed.),  Arab  Women:  Old  Boundaries,  New  Frontiers. 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 195-207.

Umar,  Muhammad  S.  2001.  ‘Education  and  Islamic  Trends  in  Northern  Nigeria: 

1970s-1990s’. Africa Today 48.2, 127-150, doi: 10.2307/4187415.

Villalón,  Leonardo  A.  1995.  Islam  and  State  Power  in  Senegal:  Disciples  and  Citizens  in 

Fatick. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

———.  2003. ‘Generational Changes, Political Stagnation, and the Evolving Dynamics 

of Religion and Politics in Senegal’. Africa Today 46.3, 129-147.

Wadud, Amina. 1992. Qur’an and Woman: Rereading the Sacred Text from a Woman’s Per-

spective. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Young, Iris Marion. 1990. Throwing Like a Girl and Other Essays in Feminist Philosophy and 

Social Theory. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

Notes

1.  Throughout this paper, I distinguish non-English terms through diﬀerent typefaces: 
Wolof,  Arabic.  Wolof  transliterations  follow  Centre  de  linguistique  appliqué  de  Dakar 
(CLAD) conventions. Notable diﬀerences from English: the letter ‘ŋ’ is pronounced like 
‘ng’ in English; ‘c’ is pronounced like ‘ch’; ‘ñ’ is pronounced like ‘ny’ (as it is in Spanish); ‘ë ’ 
is pronounced like the ‘u’ in ‘put’; ‘x’ is pronounced like ‘ch’ in the German ‘ach’; ‘q’ is 
similar but more guttural.

2.  Both students, Cheikh Baye Thiam and El-Hadj Abdoulaye Bitèye, are members of 
the Medina Baay Research Association, on whose collaborative research this article is based. 
Abdoulaye Niang and Alioune Seck also accompanied me on relevant interviews.

3.  Taalibe Baay constitute a major branch of the larger Tijānī Suﬁ order, a branch often 
called ‘Tijāniyya ʾIbrāhīmiyya’ in Arabic. Outsiders in Senegal usually call them ‘Ñaseen’ 

Downloaded from Brill.com12/10/2020 08:54:48PM
via University of Florida

 

J. Hill / Journal of Religion in Africa 40 (2010) 375-412 

411

(‘Niassène’ in French), which roughly means ‘of the Niasse family’. Taalibe Baay generally 
prefer ‘Taalibe Baay’ or ‘Ahl al-Fayḍa’ (‘People of the Flood’) or ‘Jamāʿat al-Fayḍa’ (‘Associa-
tion of the Flood’).

  4.  I founded the Medina Baay Research Association along with ﬁfteen Taalibe Baay in 

2004 while conducting doctoral dissertation research in Kaolack.

  5.  Hutson (2001, 736) is conﬁdent that she identiﬁed all the contemporary female 
Tijānī muqaddams in Kano. Among Taalibe Baay in Senegal, this seems impossible given 
the private and often sensitive nature of appointments.

  6.  The 2002 census counted 93.8% Muslims, of which 94.9% (89.0% of the total 
population) identiﬁed themselves with a Suﬁ order. 50.5% of Senegalese Muslims (47.4% 
of all Senegalese) identify as Tijānī (République du Sénégal 2002).

  7.  A ‘khalīfa’ (‘successor’ in Arabic; Wolof: xalifa) is the formal representative of a reli-
gious family, either as a whole (bearing the title ‘khalīfa ʿĀmm’/‘Caliphe général ’) or over a 
region. The ‘general’ title almost by default goes to the founder’s oldest surviving male descend-
ant, although some Suﬁs (including Baye Niasse) have appointed non-relatives as their spir-
itual heirs, leading to ambiguity about this successor’s and their own sons’ relative status.

  8.  In this paper I use ‘reformism’ to designate literalist movements, including both 
Islamist/Salafī-style movements that ultimately seek an Islamic state and Islamic daʿwah 
(preaching) movements such as the Tablīgh Jamāʿat for whom this is not explicitly part of 
their program.

  9.  Scholars have glossed kersa variously as ‘honor’ (Heath 1990; Buggenhagen 2009b), 
‘restraint’  (Heath  1990),  ‘docility’  (Buggenhagen  2004),  ‘reserve’  (McLaughlin  1997), 
‘sangfroid ’ (Irvine 1995).

10.  I gloss jottalikat (literally ‘one who hands on’) as ‘animator’ because it precisely ﬁts 
the role of animator described by Goﬀman (1981) and also because Senegalese often use 
the French word ‘animateur’ (‘presenter’) to designate someone leading or presenting to an 
assembly.

11.  ʾAdab is not an easily translated term, but as an attribute it can be translated ‘good 
morals’, ‘good behavior’ or ‘etiquette’, and the transitive verb ‘ʾaddaba’ can mean to disci-
pline, punish or chastise. Shaykh Hasan Cissé translates ʾadab as ‘discipline’ in the line 
describing how one is to perform the wird (Niasse [Ñas] 1998, 19).

12.  Cissé’s translation of ‘ʾakhā tawāḍuʿ’, literally ‘a brother of humility/lowliness’.
13.  Sayyidah (Arabic: a noble woman): A title for a woman of high spiritual rank. I use 
the Arabic spelling for this and other Islamic titles because it is widely recognized as an 
Arabic term and its pronunciation is not standardized in Wolof, where its most common 
pronunciation is probably ‘Zeydaa’, the ‘s’ being changed to a ‘z’ as an overcorrection for 
Wolof’s lack of native ‘z’, and the last vowel being elongated.

14.  This is a pseudonym due to the personal nature of the account.
15.  ‘Fayḍa’ is a rare feminine form of the word ‘fayḍ ’, which can mean ‘overﬂow’, ‘abun-
dance’,  ‘ﬂood’,  or  ‘eﬀusion’  and  is  common  in  Suﬁ  literature.  In  the Tijānī  Suﬁ  order, 
it refers to an event foretold by the order’s founder, Shaykh ʾAḥmad at-Tijānī. For expla-
nations  and  alternative  translations  of  the  word  ‘Fayḍa’  in  connection  to  Baye  Niasse’s 
movement, see Hiskett 1980 and Seesemann 2009.

16.  Literally, ‘being pulled along,’ i.e. by something outside oneself, this term can carry 

the meaning ‘insanity,’ ‘ecstasy,’ or ‘possession.’

17.  The surveys we conducted in Islamic schools in the Kaolack area showed approxi-
mately two thirds of students to be boys, suggesting that they study the Qurʾān on average 
longer than the girls. While around a third of the boys lived lived in the school away from 
their families, none of the girls did (Hill 2007a, 5).

Downloaded from Brill.com12/10/2020 08:54:48PM
via University of Florida

412 

J. Hill / Journal of Religion in Africa 40 (2010) 375-412

18.  Not to be confused with the most famous Murid disciple of Aamadu Bamba Mbacké 

of the same name.

19.  Interview with Ustaaz El-Hadj Abdoulaye Fall, Mbuur, 27 July 2009.
20.  Her name is a pseudonym, For her more extended story, see Hill 2007, 155-56.
21.  ‘Yā ʾayyuhā al-banātu zāḥamna ʾilā nayli l-ʿulā, ʾammā bi-ʾabdānin fa-lā’ (Niyās [Ñas] 
1993a, 115). Female muqaddams generally rendered this passage ‘You women, compete 
with men!’ (‘Yeen jigéen ñi, nangeen rëjrëjloo/buuxante ak góor ñi! ’), then continuing illus-
trating the second part with examples of worldly things of little value to women.

22.  Sayyidah  Maryaama  Niasse  listed  this  as  one  reason,  and  the  current  imam  of 

Medina Baye, Shaykh Tijānī Cissé, said the same of his mother, Faatumata Zaara.

23.  Two early disciples from the village, El-Hadj Bitèye and his wife Astou Thioub, 
discussed these four women in several interviews with Younoussa Thiam and me in 2004. 
In 2009, Abdoulaye Niang and I separately interviewed El-Hadj Bitèye shortly before his 
death.

24.  In interviews with Abdoulaye Niang in Darou Mbitéyène in March, 2010.
25.  I interviewd the same elders with Abdoulaye Niang again in June, 2010.
26.  Britta  Freda  (personal  communication)  has  identiﬁed  many  Mauritanian  Tijānī 
muqaddamas, both inside and outside the Fayḍa, some of whom gave the wird to other 
women and occasionally to men, yet none acting as leaders of groups.

27.  The ‘Women in Development’ paradigm dominated international development cir-
cles in the 1970s. Yet this association between women and a country’s development became 
much more hegemonic at a local level worldwide during the mid-1990s, when the World 
Bank shifted its emphasis to local level NGOs directly addressing the ‘human development 
index’.

28.  Cheikh Hassan Cissé’s African American Islamic Institute is a prime example (see 

Renders 2002).

Islamic green—since 2005.

29.  A local Romanization of Arabic shifāʾ al-ʾasqām.
30.  I have noticed a growing number of similar daayira uniforms—typically involving 

31.  Interview with Jéynaba Géy, Kaolack, 2009.
32.  Interview with Arabi Ibrahim Niasse, Dakar, 21 July, 2009.
33.  This opposition pervades Senegalese Suﬁ culture more generally (Allen F. Roberts 

and Mary Nooter Roberts 2000, 2002; Buggenhagen 2008).

34.  This saying seems to echo the saying by the poet Sanāʾī that, for the same reason, 

‘a good woman is better than a thousand men’ (qtd. in Schimmel 2003).

Downloaded from Brill.com12/10/2020 08:54:48PM
via University of Florida

