World Development Vol. 35, No. 7, pp. 1221–1236, 2007
Ó 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved
0305-750X/$ - see front matter

www.elsevier.com/locate/worlddev

doi:10.1016/j.worlddev.2006.09.017

The Perverse Eﬀects of High Brideprices

JEAN-PHILIPPE PLATTEAU
University of Namur, Belgium

and

FREDERIC GASPART *

Catholic University of Louvain, Belgium

Summary. — Marriage payments are conventionally explained by economists as resulting from the
operation of market forces. Characteristically, this type of explanation rests on the assumption that
the individuals concerned do not behave strategically. When strategic behavior is posited, parents
are able to anticipate the perverse eﬀects of high brideprices on their daughter’s happiness and on
the probability of break-up of her marriage. As a result, brideprices may be set at levels lower than
those justiﬁed by the brides’ relative scarcity in the marriage market. Using both quantitative and
qualitative evidence, such a strategic approach is tested on the basis of original data collected in the
Senegal river valley.
Ó 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Key words — marriage payments, women’s bargaining power, strategic behavior, arranged vs love
marriages, West Africa

1. INTRODUCTION

The standard theory of marriage proposed by
economists is based on a rather straightforward
extension of the market conceived as an alloca-
tive mechanism that ‘‘assigns’’ men and women
to each other (Becker, 1974, 1981; Grossbard-
Shechtman, 1993; Quinsumbing & Fafchamps,
2005). An important implication of such a
framework is that the side holding the precious
resource, for example, the bride’s family in a
situation of scarcity of women, can ask for a
side payment in order to compensate for the
higher value of its indivisible contribution. In
assessing the attractiveness of potential mar-
riage partners, emphasis is put on determinants
of the gains from marriage, such as the relative
productivity of men and women inside and out-
side the home,
income, age, education, and
other traits aﬀecting productivity.

In spite of its simplicity, the neoclassical eco-
nomic theory of marriage and divorce has been
proven compatible with some signiﬁcant styl-
ized facts and with some interesting anthropo-
logical evidence. For example, given that the

presence of a dowry can be interpreted as
reﬂecting a lower wage for the wife, this theory
can explain (i) why dowry seems to be strongly
linked with monogamous (and polyandrous)
marriage all over the world; (ii) why it is that
in sub-Saharan Africa the institution of bride-
price is more often found in polygynous than

* Thanks are due to the Ministry of Belgian Coopera-
tion, the Rural Development Department of the FAO,
the MacArthur Foundation and the University of
Namur which provided the funds required to carry out
the present study. Our gratitude also goes to Abdoulaye
Niang and his team of enumerators from the University
Gaston Berger at Saint-Louis (Senegal) who carried out
the day-to-day ﬁeldwork. The study has also relied on
the valuable help of Aminata Niane who participated
in the checking and coding of the questionnaires, and of
Luc Stevens who assisted in the processing of the data.
Special thanks are due to the three anonymous referees
of this journal who raised valid points and made several
useful suggestions, thus prompting us to considerably
improve the paper. Final revision accepted: September
13, 2006.

1221

1222

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

in monogamous societies; and (iii) why in the
same region brideprice payments tend to be
higher in more polygynous societies (Gross-
bard, 1978, pp. 35–36). As a matter of fact,
polygamy implies that there is a stronger de-
mand for wife services.

Evidence collected in the Senegal river valley,
however, suggests that marriage payments can-
not be simply accounted for in terms of the
above neoclassical theory. Indeed, discussions
with women in this area revealed that strategic
considerations may play a key role in inﬂuenc-
ing the setting of
the brideprice. Strategic
behavior actually arises from awareness that
high brideprices have potentially perverse ef-
fects. More speciﬁcally, because they cause
ﬁnancial duress for the husband, high bride-
prices are liable to stoke tensions and frustra-
tions in the married couple, and these may
harm the woman—especially if she is ill treated
as a result—and eventually lead to the break-up
of the marriage. To the extent that parents
internalize the above indirect eﬀects, because
of their own understanding or because of the
pressures exercised by their daughters, the stra-
tegic approach predicts that brideprices are
likely to be inﬂuenced by the anticipated prob-
ability of divorce and, hence, by whether the
union is a love or an arranged marriage. In
the conventional theory of marriage, by con-
trast, the distinction between these two types
of marriage is irrelevant.

In the present paper, we want to argue that
the fall in brideprices observed in the Senegal
river valley during the last decades is more
readily accounted in terms of a strategic analy-
sis than in terms of a standard demand/supply
argument. Our attempt can be seen as a contin-
uation of the pioneering eﬀort of Bloch and
Rao (2002) who have addressed the issue of
domestic violence caused by dowries in India
with the help of game-theoretical economic
analysis. It also has clear links with the litera-
ture devoted to examining the impact of distri-
bution of resources between spouses at the time
of marriage on the woman’s bargaining power
(Quinsumbing & de la Briere, 2000; Quinsum-
bing & Fafchamps, 2005; Quinsumbing &
Maluccio, 2003).

The outline of the paper is as follows. After
providing general information about the data,
Section 2 presents basic facts regarding the
brideprices, the relative scarcity of men and wo-
men of marriageable age, and their trends over
the last decades. Section 3 presents the essential
intuition behind our strategic approach and

draws a number of important predictions that
can be derived from it. In Section 4, qualitative
evidence is adduced suggesting that high bride-
prices have perverse eﬀects of which a signiﬁ-
cant number of women and even men are well
aware. Section 5 provides quantitative evidence
that the strategic theory of brideprices is able to
explain phenomena that are left out by the con-
ventional theory. In particular,
it is able to
explain the diﬀerential impact of education on
brideprices depending on the type of marriage
(love or arranged marriage). Section 6 con-
cludes the paper.

2. BRIDEPRICES IN THE SENEGAL

RIVER VALLEY: BROAD

CHARACTERISTICS AND TRENDS

(a) Incidence and composition of brideprices

Data have been collected in 1998 in 16 vil-
lages of the Senegal river valley that lies in
the northernmost part of the country and sepa-
rates it from Mauritania. Of unequal sizes,
these villages are located in the delta area
(Department of Dagana) and the middle valley
(Departments of Podor and Matam) along the
main road running from Saint-Louis to Bakel.
Seven of the sample villages are located in the
former zone while the remaining nine villages
are situated in the latter. In addition to focus
group interviews, household questionnaires
have been administered separately to 185
women, 60% of them in the middle valley and
35% in the delta. 1 These women have been en-
gaged in 220 marriages, which makes for a ratio
of 1.2 marriages per woman. Since the middle
valley is essentially inhabited by Toucouleur
people while the delta has been colonized
mainly by Wolof people, the Wolof-Toucouleur
dichotomy is an almost perfect proxy for geo-
graphical location along the delta-middle valley
axis.

The questionnaire has been designed to elicit
detailed information about the personal char-
acteristics
(education, age, occupation, . . .)
and histories of the individuals interviewed.
Personal histories include: all marriage events
and contracts (including the brideprice); the
role of brides in the negotiation of the bride-
the reasons for elopements, divorces
price;
and separations;
the procedures in case of
divorce and separation (family negotiations,
repayment of the brideprice, . . .); the attitudes
of women and men with respect to marriage

THE PERVERSE EFFECTS OF HIGH BRIDEPRICES

1223

payments, levirate, and polygamous marriages;
the customary rules governing women’s access
to land within marriage situations, and in the
event of separation/divorce, unwed mother-
hood and widowhood.

The practice of bride-wealth payments is
widespread in the Senegal river valley. Thus,
in more than 97% of the marriage cases in
our sample, such payments were made by the
groom (or his father)
to the bride. If we
consider only money payments, the proportion
falls only very slightly, to 95%. Traditionally,
brideprices were paid under the form of cattle
heads. Yet, this practice has been declining rap-
idly over the last decades as attested by the rel-
atively small proportion of cases (only 9 out of
185 sample marriages) in which the marriage
payment consists at least partly in a gift of cat-
tle. Clearly, replacement of cattle gifts by cash
payments is progressing fast in northern Sene-
gal. As expected, there is an inverse relationship
between the values of the two forms of gift:
when more cattle is given to the bride’s parents,
less cash is handed to them. 2

The opposite relationship holds true for less
substantial personal gifts made in kind to the
bride or her parents. Our data report the num-
ber of such gifts by the groom’s family, yet
assessing their monetary value proved an insur-
mountable task. Fortunately, since there exists
a strong, positive correlation between the cash
amount of the brideprice and the number of
personal gifts made in kind on the occasion of
a marriage, we can use the former as a proxy
for total marriage payments in any analysis in-
tended to explain variations in such payments.
In our survey area, the brideprice has three
main components. First, there is a core element,
the amount of which is ﬁxed by custom, that
serves the function of legitimizing the marriage.
Part of it is actually conceived of as ‘‘the price
of virginity’’ and is exclusively meant to enable
the bride to purchase necessities
such as
clothes, ornaments, utensils, working tools,
and other articles necessary for the functioning
of the new household (see also Papps, 1983,
p. 206). Because divorced women, widows,
and unwed mothers have lost their virginity,
the husband’s family cannot claim back this
element of the brideprice. Second, there is a
sum destined for the ﬁnancing of a feast where
friends from the same age group as the bride
meet to eat, sing, and dance in her honor. Var-
ious gifts of food items, contributions to the lo-
cal mosque, and other miscellaneous expenses
also form part of this category of marriage

expenditures. Since the marriage feast beneﬁted
the groom’s as well as the bride’s party, repay-
ment of the corresponding expenses is not ex-
pected in the event of marriage failure.

Third, there is a component of the brideprice
which is ﬁxed in the course of negotiations
between the parties concerned and which can
therefore freely vary from case to case. A por-
tion of it is seen as a compensation aimed at
rewarding the bride’s parents, and sometimes
also elder members of the extended family, for
their eﬀorts in bringing her up. Contrary to
the ﬁrst two elements of the brideprice, the cus-
tom provides that payments made on this score
must be paid back if the woman is considered
responsible for the break-up of the marriage
and the husband insists on being indemniﬁed.
Note that local social norms provide a rather
clear understanding of the circumstances under
which it is considered legitimate for a woman to
cause the break-up of her marriage. In fact, the
assignment of guilt is highly biased against
women since it is only when the husband is
impotent,
irreducibly unfaithful, or when he
repeatedly indulges in acts of physical violence
against his wife that the woman can escape
blame for running away from him.

The presence of

this discretionary,

freely
negotiable element, explains why there is con-
siderable variance in the brideprice amounts at
any given point of time: the coeﬃcient of varia-
tion is close to 1.4! At the same time, however,
a modal value sticks out that hangs around
15,000 CFA ($1 = 505 CFA), which is far be-
low the mean and the median values (51,208
CFA and 35,000 CFA, respectively). This mod-
al value can be interpreted as the sum of the ﬁrst
two elements of the brideprice, which are set by
custom. In other words, they represent the min-
imum brideprice which the custom requires to
be paid when the bride is married for the ﬁrst
time. Our sample data show that the average
brideprice for widows (19,000 CFA) is consider-
ably smaller than the average brideprice for
separated/divorced women (40,395 CFA), and
for women who are married for the ﬁrst time
(48,369 CFA). The large diﬀerence between
widows and separated/divorced women is lar-
gely explained by the fact that the former are
much older than the latter. 3

Finally, it is worth noticing that, contrary to
what was found by Quinsumbing and Faf-
champs (2005) for rural Ethiopia, the value of
the brideprice in Senegal largely exceeds the
cost of the wedding (the second aforementioned
component).

1224

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

(b) Time trend of real brideprices and the

marriage market

Looking at the time trend of nominal bride-
prices and bearing in mind that the ﬁrst mar-
riage involving one of our sample women
occurred in 1946, we ﬁnd from a simple regres-
sion estimate that
the brideprice monetary
amount has a tendency to increase over time,
but at an annual rate of growth of only about
2%. However, when we estimate the brideprice
regression after introducing a dummy to distin-
guish the pre- and post-devaluation periods
(the CFA was devalued by 50% in 1993), not
only is the coeﬃcient of that dummy not signif-
icantly diﬀerent from zero (the devaluation has
not caused a change in the structure of the
equation), but the coeﬃcient of the time regres-
sor itself also ceases to be signiﬁcant. 4 The
devaluation of the national money provides us
with an external shock allowing us to test
whether the local economy of the Senegal river
valley economy is integrated with, or largely
insulated from, the wider economic space. The
ﬁrst above result points to the latter possibility.
Moreover, since the inﬂation rate measured by
the rate of growth of the consumer price index
has exceeded 6.5% per year in Senegal over the
period 1963–98 (our own computation from the
IMF international ﬁnancial statistics), it is evi-
dent that brideprice payments in the surveyed
area have decreased signiﬁcantly in real
terms. 5

Could the decline in real brideprices be pos-
sibly explained by a decreasing scarcity of
women in the marriage market, as a simple
supply/demand argument would suggest? The
evidence available points to the opposite situa-
tion.

The most direct method to gauge the evolu-
tion of marriageable women’s relative scarcity
consists of looking at the gender ratio for
marriageable groups over the years, as in Rao
(1993). (Available men/women ratios turn out
to be much less than unity in most relevant
age categories). Unfortunately, such a method
is highly unreliable in the context of our study
because men/women ratios in marriageable
age groups are heavily biased downwards
owing to the presence of signiﬁcant migratory
ﬂows that primarily involve men. This gives rise
to a serious problem inasmuch as the standard
pattern when a man undertakes a long-distance
migration (usually to a neighboring country or
to France) is that he leaves as a bachelor, saves
some money abroad (partly with a view to pay-

ing the brideprice), and returns to his native vil-
lage after a few years to marry a woman from
the same locality or from a neighboring one.
He may then go abroad again for a few more
years, leaving his wife in the village to take care
of his land. As a result, migration does not af-
fect the demand/supply situation in the mar-
riage market, at least not as much as gender
ratios would suggest. Since migratory ﬂows
have gone on increasing over most of the years
during the study period, using gender ratios is
problematic.

There are two other approaches through
which we can nevertheless assess the evolution
of the relative abundance or scarcity of women
of marriageable age. The ﬁrst approach is based
on the so-called ‘‘marriage squeeze’’ argument
(Goldman & Pebley, 1989), and just requires
that we look at the evolution of the rate of pop-
ulation growth. The underlying idea is the fol-
lowing: when a country has higher rates of
population growth, the younger cohorts will
be of larger size than older cohorts, and, since
men typically marry women younger than
them, we can expect that there will be more
women than men (of marriageable age) in the
marriage market. In Senegal, the population
growth rate exceeded 2.5% during the period
covered by our study, which is quite high and
implies that there is very likely a marriage
squeeze in eﬀect. Yet, population growth tends
to decelerate: while the rate of population
growth was 2.8% during the 1980s, it decreased
somewhat, to 2.6%, during the 1990s. If any-
thing,
the marriage
squeeze eﬀect should have been reduced, as a
consequence of which the relative abundance
of marriageable women may be expected to
have fallen.

the size of

therefore,

The second approach uses four indirect indi-
cators: (i) comparative ages at ﬁrst marriage for
women and men; (ii) comparative life expecta-
tions; (iii) the incidence of polygamy; and (iv)
the structure of migratory ﬂows. For the reason
explained above, migration is probably neutral
in its eﬀects on the marriage market. The ﬁrst
two indicators indicate a growing scarcity
(more precisely, a decreasing abundance) of
brides, while the third one points to the oppo-
site conclusion.

To begin with, oﬃcial census data for the
whole of Senegal, and for the region of Saint-
Louis in particular, show that the median age
at ﬁrst marriage for women belonging to
various age
increasing, and
the increases are larger for urban areas and

categories

is

THE PERVERSE EFFECTS OF HIGH BRIDEPRICES

1225

Table 1. Average age at ﬁrst marriage according to the

age of sample women at the time of interviewa

Age of sample
women at the
time of interview
(years)

16–27

16–24
25–27

27–34
>34

All categories

Average age

Frequencies

at ﬁrst marriage

(years)

16.3

15.0
17.8

16.3
14.6

15.7

39

21
18

40
50

129

a Calculations are based on a sample restricted to the
ﬁrst marriages only.

educated women (Ndiaye, Ayad, & Gaye, 1997;
Table 5.3, p. 58). 6 Our sample data point to a
similar conclusion: age at ﬁrst marriage for wo-
men has increased over time while the opposite
trend is noticeable for men (see Table 1, for the
evidence regarding women). Since the gender
gap in ages at ﬁrst marriage is thus gradually
narrowing down, on that score women have
become less abundant in the marriage market.
Notice carefully that, since our question-
naires were speciﬁcally addressed to married
women, there is a sample selection bias that
bears upon the age structure of our respon-
dents: our sample is not representative of the
age categories of all the women, but only of
the age categories of married women. A logical
consequence is that the youngest women whom
we have interviewed were married very early,
hence the relatively low age at ﬁrst marriage
for the youngest women in our sample. This
characteristic explains why age at ﬁrst marriage
does not
(16–
27 years) to the intermediate category (27–
34 years), and why, when the ﬁrst age category
is further decomposed into two subcategories
(16–24 years and 25–27 years), age at ﬁrst mar-
riage undergoes a marked increase, instead of a
decrease, from the youngest to the next-to-
youngest age category. Had we captured young
women, whether married or unmarried, such a
discontinuity in the relationship between age
at ﬁrst marriage and the women’s cohort would
not have been observed.

increase from the youngest

The sex ratio of expectations of life at birth,
as can be inferred from oﬃcial data, has also
changed in a way that makes brides less abun-
dant. During the period 1970–95, indeed, the
gender ratio of life expectations at birth (with
the statistic for women in the numerator and

that for men in the denominator) for Senegal
has slightly decreased, thus reﬂecting a more ra-
pid lengthening of life expectation for men than
for women during the last decades. 7 It must
nevertheless be reckoned that, since such an ef-
fect aﬀects the sex ratio primarily in older age
groups, its inﬂuence on the marriage market
is probably negligible. One would, indeed, need
exceptional events distorting the gender ratio
for speciﬁc cohorts for factor (ii) to have a
signiﬁcant inﬂuence.

Regarding polygamous practices, our sample
data show that they are quite pervasive in the
sample area: 55% of the sample women who
were married at the time of the interview were
involved in polygamous unions. 8 Yet, the inci-
dence of such unions tends to recede over the
years: the average age of women under polyga-
mous unions is 39 years compared with only
30 years for women under monogamous mar-
riages (this diﬀerence is statistically signiﬁcant
at 100% level). As a result, the (realized) de-
mand for marriageable women declines relative
to their supply.

For the explanation of the fall of (real) bride-
prices in terms of a simple demand/supply
argument to hold true, the eﬀect of the decreas-
ing incidence of polygamous unions should
outweigh the eﬀect of changing ages at ﬁrst
marriage (and changing life expectations), so
that pressure of men’s demand for women in
the marriage market is being eased. One could
actually think of a scenario in which the fall
of brideprices constitutes the price response,
and rising age at ﬁrst marriage for women
(and decreasing age at ﬁrst marriage for men)
the quantity response, to the imbalance in the
marriage market created by the falling demand
for polygamy. The fall in men’s demand for
polygamy would thus be the autonomous force,
and changes in ages at ﬁrst marriage the in-
duced phenomenon driving the equilibrating
process. Although compatible with the ob-
served trends in brideprices and ages at ﬁrst
marriage, such a scenario is not plausible.

The reasoning is as follows. From our survey
data, men’s preferences for polygamy appear to
be rather stable over time while women increas-
ingly assert their preference for monogamous
unions. The diﬀerence between the average
age of men who have expressed a preference
for monogamy (42.6 years) and that of men
who feel happy with the polygamous system
(45 years) is not statistically signiﬁcant at the
90% level of conﬁdence. By contrast, the aver-
age age of women who have expressed a clear

1226

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

preference for monogamy (31.7 years) is sig-
niﬁcantly lower than the age of women who
have justiﬁed polygamous practices or, at least,
have not found any reason to oppose them
(38.3 years). Since polygamous practices have
actually receded while men’s latent demand
for them does not seem to go down, we may
conclude that this demand is somehow ra-
tioned. In other words, frustration of the desire
of many men to have several wives provides the
adjustment mechanism through which demand
for brides is brought down to the available sup-
ply. Under this alternative, favored scenario,
changes in the ﬁrst age at marriage for men
and women are the autonomous force govern-
ing the transformation of the marriage market,
while decreasing polygamy is endogenous:
being comparatively fewer, women are increas-
ingly able to refuse to enter into polyga-
mous unions, thereby following their evolving
preferences for monogamy. In line with this
conclusion, one would expect brideprices to
have risen instead of having declined in real
terms.

Admittedly,

the demand/supply argument
can be reﬁned by taking quality aspects into
account. More speciﬁcally, falling brideprices
could be explained by the growing incidence
of education among women—a fact supported
by our data—if education is deemed an unde-
sirable attribute by men, say, because educated
women tend to be less committed to household
activities, including care of children (Becker,
1981). However, this hypothetical explanation
must be rejected in the light of the fact that,
in our
for
educated women (deﬁned as those who have
completed their primary studies)
than for
noneducated ones: the average brideprice is
53,809 CFA for the former but only 36,538
CFA for the latter, a diﬀerence that is statisti-
cally signiﬁcant at the 99% conﬁdence level.

sample, brideprices are higher

3. A STRATEGIC APPROACH TO

DETERMINATION OF BRIDEPRICES

Marriage payments are conventionally re-
garded as a price that serves to match men
and women assortatively. The amount and the
direction of such payments are therefore en-
tirely explained in terms of a supply–demand
argument. Yet, in so far as a rule prevails that
the brideprice must be returned to the husband
or his family in the event of a marriage break-
up, strategic considerations come into play.

In the general case, the bride’s parents receive
the brideprice from the groom’s party and they
use it to meet family expenditures, including the
payment of brideprices on behalf of their own
sons. In such conditions, the repayment obliga-
tion in the event of marriage failure falls on the
parents of the bride and not on the bride her-
self. Heavy pressure on the daughter to stay
with her husband can then be expected from
them, all the more so as the amount to be re-
paid is larger. By agreeing to receive a high
brideprice on the occasion of their daughter’s
marriage, the parents would therefore manifest
the importance they attach to the union and
their willingness to preserve it in all circum-
stances. Of course, by agreeing to pay a high
brideprice in the ﬁrst place, the groom’s parents
convey the same signal. In short, a high bride-
price serves as a commitment device aimed at
minimizing the risk of marriage break-up.

Neither the groom’s nor the bride’s point of
view ﬁgures out in the above strategies. The
fact of the matter is that in conventionally ar-
ranged marriages they do not have a real say
in marriage negotiations. Consider now the
standpoint of young women who have become
better aware of their own interests and are
ready and able to express them in an articulate
fashion. One expects that they will bear pres-
sure on their parents so as to make them accept
lower brideprice payments. In this way, a bride
wants to be re-assured about her parents’ abil-
ity to repay the brideprice in case her marriage
turns sour and she wants to escape from it
(see, e.g., Jewsiewicki, 1993 for Congo).

Moreover,

if a daughter is able to freely
choose her marriage partner and persuade her
parents to accept her choice—the practice of
love marriages, which is quickly developing in
many parts of Africa (see, e.g., Ensminger &
Knight, 1997, pp. 11–12)—the parents will
probably refuse to comply with the husband’s
(or husband’s family’s) request for brideprice
repayment in the event that their daughter
wants to separate or divorce. Since she will be
deemed responsible for
the choice of her
spouse, indeed, she will be expected to bear
the consequences of her own decisions, which
is likely to imply that the obligation to return
the brideprice will fall on her rather than on
her parents. Under these conditions, the daugh-
ter’s interest during marriage negotiations is
again to drive her parents to content themselves
with a modest brideprice.

Another, even more obvious strategic consid-
eration that would be in the mind of a bride

THE PERVERSE EFFECTS OF HIGH BRIDEPRICES

1227

eager to marry a man of her own liking is the
concern that such a man may be unable to
pay the brideprice if it is set at too high a level
by her parents. This theory, although it takes
into account some strategic interactions, fails
to elucidate the diﬀerentiated eﬀects of the
bride’s education on the brideprice depending
on whether the marriage was arranged or not.
According to this well-established view, educa-
tion can either raise the brideprice by increasing
the groom’s willingness to pay or it can have
the exactly opposite eﬀect if education is an
undesirable trait in the groom’s preferences.
These eﬀects do not interact with the type of
marriage.

The alternative approach that we advocate is
based on the following idea: brideprices are
kept down under the inﬂuence of strategic con-
siderations that take into account the adverse
consequences of high brideprices for the bride.
As suggested by Ensminger and Knight, a shift
in bargaining power in favor of young women
is probably at the root of the declining trend
of (real) brideprices that they also observed in
Kenya (Ensminger & Knight, 1997, pp. 10–11;
see also Schneider, 1964). The underlying
framework can be simply described as fol-
lows. 9 At a ﬁrst point in time, the bride’s par-
ents set
the brideprice. Then
marriage occurs and uncertainty about the cou-
ple’s harmony is realized. More exactly, the
husband’s preferences between staying with
his wife and triggering a divorce in order to
recoup the brideprice is drawn in some prob-
ability distribution. As a consequence of this
preference, the husband chooses to behave ni-
cely or not with his wife. The wife is the third
and last player in the game, reacting upon the
husband’s decision by running away or not.

the level of

The wife’s utility in the end is high if she stays
with a nicely behaving husband. It takes on an
intermediate value called ‘‘the exit option’’ if
she runs away. Finally, it is very low if she stays
with an unkind husband. The husband’s prefer-
ences arbitrate between money (the recouped
brideprice in case of divorce) and staying with
his wife, as explained earlier. The only complex
preferences in the model are those of the bride’s
parents. Their utility rises with the level of the
brideprice, but also exhibit some degree of
altruism toward their daughter, which is mea-
sured by a ‘‘caring parameter.’’ This caring
parameter can be alternatively interpreted as
the leverage that a daughter is able to exercise
on her parents with a view to bending their
decisions in her favor. It
then reﬂects the

daughter’s ability to persuade her parents that
caring for her own interests is a fair stand.
Bargaining power considerations are therefore
embedded into our theory of brideprice deter-
mination.

The time sequence of the model makes sure
that the level of the brideprice inﬂuences the
husband’s behavior: if set too high, the hus-
band is induced to make conjugal
life hard
for his wife. Drawing the husband’s preferences
at random after marriage is a valid representa-
tion of several phenomena. Since the brideprice
is frequently paid in successive instalments, or
necessitates the taking of a loan, the husband
may run into unexpected ﬁnancial diﬃculties,
especially if the brideprice is high. Or, alterna-
tively, the husband may gradually realize that
his wife’s value is not as high as he expected,
say, because she does not bear children, or is
not productive enough in performing agricul-
tural tasks, or has a bad character implying
that she does not easily follow his orders (e.g.,
in regard of the allocation of her work time be-
tween his and her plots of land), or does not get
on well with his family.

These circumstances may thus lead the hus-
band to think that his wife is not worth the
amount of the brideprice that was agreed upon
at the time of the marriage. The ﬁnancial bur-
den which may still be weighing on him may
then cause bitter resentment and induce him
to lower his contribution to the household. As
a result, the wife, who is the third player in
the game, may be prompted to leave her hus-
band even though she then has to return the
brideprice. Sequential rationality implies that
the bride’s parents anticipate this potential
course of events when they set the level of the
brideprice. Of course, they face uncertainty
about the groom’s temper and the future cou-
ple’s harmony. Hence they cannot nullify the
probability of breaking up. What is important
is their spontaneous reluctance to set the bride-
price at an arbitrarily high level, even if the
groom were showing a high willingness to
pay. The brideprice cannot be viewed, in this
theory, as a competitive equilibrium price.

Under the above assumptions, the parents
will set the brideprice at such a level that the
marginal direct utility gain from an increase
in the brideprice is exactly equal to the expected
loss of utility arising from the increased repay-
ment burden weighing on their daughter plus
the utility loss resulting from the increased
probability of divorce. Note carefully that the
above analytical framework, and the resulting

1228

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

equilibrium condition are left unchanged if the
parents instead of the daughter are supposed to
repay the brideprice in the event of divorce. The
main causal factor in this theory is the parents’
expectation of the impact of the brideprice on
the well-being of their daughter through the
probability of divorce. No particular matching
mechanism is playing a part in this causal
mechanism. As a result, our argument is there-
fore compatible with any theory of matching,
from the most romantic to the most materialis-
tic ones. In particular, it can be viewed as a
friendly amendment
conventional,
to the
Beckerian theory of marriage.

Our theory does not explain either whose
marriage is arranged and whose marriage is
not. Our data hardly support the conjecture
that a high value of the caring parameter is
associated with love marriages. Indeed,
less
than 25% of the women engaged in a love mar-
riage have expressed the belief that women can
inﬂuence the level of the brideprice in the
course of marriage negotiations. This propor-
tion is admittedly signiﬁcantly higher than that
observed among women engaged in arranged
marriages (10%), yet this diﬀerence is spurious.
Indeed, remarried women evince a much stron-
ger propensity to opt for love rather than
arranged marriages, and they also have much
more conﬁdence in their bargaining strength
than other women.

A number of interesting predictions can be
derived from our central equilibrium condition.
First, the brideprice is negatively correlated
with the parents’ caring parameter: when par-
ents attach more importance to their daughter’s
well-being, or when their daughter is more able
to assert her own interests and exercise inﬂu-
ence on their decisions, they are induced to low-
er the brideprice, all other things being equal.
Notice that, if the caring parameter was corre-
lated with the type of marriage, a more complex
causality chain would be triggered. For exam-
ple, a low value for the caring parameter may
unexpectedly lead to a love marriage, whereby
parents hope to extract a higher brideprice
from the groom because of his strong sentimen-
tal inclination.

Second, the brideprice set by the parents is
positively correlated with the daughter’s exit
option value. The interpretation is straightfor-
ward: parents worry less about their daughter’s
separation prospect if she has better fall-back
options in case she ﬁnds herself on her own.
Hence they can ask for a higher brideprice. This
result can apparently be construed as implying

that higher brideprices will be required by par-
ents for more educated daughters. However,
this is only a partial eﬀect. Another eﬀect fol-
lows from the ﬁrst aforementioned result: a
higher level of education is likely to be trans-
lated into a better ability to self-assert and a
stronger bargaining power vis-a-vis parents, 10
in particular. As a consequence, the brideprice
should be set at lower levels for educated wo-
men. There are thus two eﬀects running into
opposite directions and the net impact of edu-
cation on the brideprice is a priori indetermi-
nate.

Third, an increase in the household’s intrinsic
value of staying together is predicted to be
associated with lower brideprices. Indeed, be-
cause parents anticipate that the opportunity
cost of separation has become larger, they low-
er the brideprice in order to reduce the prob-
ability of divorce. This brings the type of
marriage into the picture more convincingly
than through an hypothetical correlation with
the caring parameter. In arranged marriages,
the intrinsic value of staying together is argu-
ably lower than in cases where partners have
freely chosen each other. Consequently, it is
more important for the parents of the bride to
anticipate the likelihood of a future break-up
in arranged marriages. This is all the more
so as parents feel personally and ﬁnancially
responsible in the event of break-up of a mar-
riage that they have themselves ﬁxed. In con-
trast, the marginal impact of the brideprice on
the probability of divorce can be safely as-
sumed to be negligible in the case of love mar-
riages. Such an assumption is all the more
justiﬁed because parents feel less concerned by
a marriage failure if they have not chosen the
partner and not engaged their (full) responsibil-
ity when the union was sealed. In the model,
this is reﬂected by the fact that parents do not
believe that the brideprice has much inﬂuence
on the probability of divorce in the case of a
love marriage, and they feel free to set it at a
comparatively high level. 11

To sum up, for love marriages, the conven-
tional theory more or less applies because the
probability of divorce is low and not very sen-
sitive to the brideprice. The causal chain ap-
pears to be diﬀerent in the event of arranged
marriages and,
in particular, the impact of
bride’s education on the level of the brideprice
may be very diﬀerent from what is observed
in love marriages. In both cases, this impact is
ambiguous, but for diﬀerent reasons depending
upon whether the marriage is arranged or not.

THE PERVERSE EFFECTS OF HIGH BRIDEPRICES

1229

From the foregoing discussion, it is evident
that the impact on brideprices of moderniza-
tion, understood as the combined eﬀect of di-
verse factors, is also ambiguous. In particular,
if an increased sensitiveness of fathers to their
daughters’ own perceptions of happiness, or
an increased assertiveness of young women ex-
posed to modern values of self-emancipation,
tends to push brideprices down, an enlarged
access of women to nonagricultural
income
opportunities has the opposite eﬀect of raising
the brideprice. Moreover, as we know, the im-
pact on brideprices of rising levels of women’s
education is ambiguous.

In the above discussion, eﬀects arising from
supply/demand forces operating in the mar-
riage market have been left out. It is easy to
see that these forces could well push brideprices
in a direction opposite to that predicted by stra-
tegic considerations alone. Rather than being
viewed as rival theories, the two approaches
should be considered as complementary instru-
ments to analyze marriage payments.

In the following two sections, we will provide
empirical evidence to the eﬀect that our strate-
gic approach to marriage payments should be
taken seriously. The ﬁrst set of evidence is of
a qualitative nature while the second set is
based on quantitative information.

4. QUALITATIVE EVIDENCE

Our sample data based on the household sur-
vey conﬁrm that the brideprice has to be re-
turned to the husband’s family in the event of
marriage breakdown (this question was speciﬁ-
cally addressed in the questionnaire). Yet, they
also show that this repayment obligation tends
to apply only when the woman is considered

guilty of causing the couple’s splitting. As we
have already pointed out (see supra, Section
2), the assignment of guilt is highly biased
against women since it is only in extreme cir-
cumstances (when the husband is impotent,
irreducibly unfaithful, or when he repeatedly
indulges in acts of physical violence) that the
wife is not blamed for running away from
him. The taking of a new wife by the husband,
unequal treatment of his diﬀerent wives, and
continuous conﬂicts between co-wives are not
regarded as misdemeanors that could justify a
woman’s decision to leave her husband. 12

Moreover, it bears emphasis that no repay-
ment of the brideprice is due when the woman
has reached a relatively advanced age, a logical
consequence of the fact that she has then al-
ready contributed a lot to the household by
upbringing children and undertaking agricul-
tural activities.

In order to check the extent to which women
actually believe that high brideprices run coun-
ter to their interests due to the repayment prob-
lem in the event of marriage failure, we have
asked them in a general, nondirective manner
whether they think that high brideprices are
unfavorable to them and, in the aﬃrmative,
what are the shortcomings involved (again, this
question was speciﬁcally addressed in the ques-
tionnaire, alongside queries about details of
their own marriage history or histories). The
same question has been asked to a more re-
stricted sample of men. The results are pre-
sented in Tables 2 and 3.

It is evident from Table 2 that around 60% of
the sample women have found high brideprices
to be problematic for one reason or another.
This said, it bears emphasis that, contrary to
our expectations, repayment problems in the
event of marriage failure has not been the main

Table 2. Shortcomings of high brideprices as mentioned by sample women

High brideprices . . .

Percentage of women who
made the following answera

1. Alienate women
2. Constitute an obstacle to divorce because they are diﬃcult to pay back
3. May prevent a man from marrying a woman he loves
4. Cause a waste of money or the indebtedness of the husband
5. Make relationships between the two families diﬃcult
6. Violate an Islamic tenet
7. Have other negative eﬀects

Percentage of women who do not see problems with high brideprices

55.4
18.1
8.4
12.0
3.6
2.4
15.7

40.3

a The percentage total exceeds 100% because some women have mentioned several shortcomings of high brideprices.

1230

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

Table 3. Shortcomings of high brideprices as mentioned by sample men

High brideprices . . .

Percentage of men who

made the following answera

1. Make marriages diﬃcult
2. Drive husbands to ill treat their wife
3. Cause a waste of money or ﬁnancial problems for the husband
4. Alienate women
5. Aﬀect divorces
6. Violate an Islamic tenet
7. Other eﬀects

Percentage of men who do not see any problem with high BPs

14.3
4.8
57.1
12.7
7.9
1.6
1.6

24.1

a The percentage total exceeds 100% because some men have mentioned several shortcomings of high brideprices.

concern expressed by them. As a matter of fact,
hardly one-ﬁfth of the women who worry about
high brideprices have speciﬁcally mentioned
such problems. One explanation behind such
a rather low proportion is the persistingly wide-
spread idea that, in the event of a marriage fail-
ure, the two families concerned will try their
best to reconcile the two conﬂicting spouses
or to ﬁnd an amicable agreement (especially if
the marriage was arranged by the families).

Another explanation is the aforementioned
fact that, even when the woman runs away
from her husband, the obligation of brideprice
repayment is enforced only when she is deemed
responsible for the marriage failure. Hence
many women may not consider brideprice
repayment as a serious problem simply because
it does not often arise in reality. Note that older
women (as well as women who have attended a
Coranic rather than an oﬃcial, secular school)
are disproportionately
represented among
those who have explicitly stated that the bride-
price ought to be returned to the husband’s
family in the event of a marriage break-up.
The obligation of brideprice repayment
is
apparently seen as less compelling by younger
than by older cohorts of women.

If only 20% of the women concerned by high
brideprices have pointed to the diﬃculty of
repayment in the case of marriage failure, as
many as 55% of them have stressed the fact that
high brideprices contribute to ‘‘alienate wo-
men,’’ ‘‘to transform them into commodities’’
or ‘‘into slaves of their husband.’’ All these
are strong expressions that reﬂect deep-seated
frustrations and, sometimes, intense suﬀering.
Behind them, as further probing revealed, lies
the belief that the husband and his family easily
come to resent high brideprices because of the
ﬁnancial stress caused. The resentment lingers

on when the brideprice is paid in instalments
and the husband or his family regret having
agreed to an unbearable burden, especially if
they ﬁnd fault with the wife or daughter-in-
law for one or several of the reasons mentioned
earlier (she does not bear children, is not pro-
ductive enough, has a diﬃcult character, . . .).
In such conditions, the woman is exposed to a
serious risk of harassment and ill treatment
by the husband and his relatives since she is
considered to be the cause of their problems.

Moreover, 12% of

the women concerned
pointed out that high brideprices have the dis-
advantage of causing the indebtedness of the
husband (together with the fact that they in-
volve a waste of money), yet without complain-
ing about their own suﬀering as a result of such
indebtedness.

Finally, in a context where love marriages
gradually emerge as an alternative to marriages
arranged by the two families concerned (love
marriages represent almost 40% of all unions
recorded in our sample survey), it is not surpris-
ing that some women (more than 8%) view high
brideprices as a potential hindrance to the free
choice of a bride by a relatively poor groom.
In this connection, it bears emphasis that love
marriages do not imply a radical departure
from customary unions but only a partial
emancipation from the parents’ tutorship. In
point of fact, if youngsters elect their partner
in the absence of any interference by their par-
ents, they are usually keen to have their choice
approved by the latter, and to have their union
sanctioned according to custom, which implies
the payment of a brideprice and the perfor-
mance of prescribed rituals. An important
reason behind this eagerness to go through
a customary marriage is that access to land
for children whose parents have passed away

THE PERVERSE EFFECTS OF HIGH BRIDEPRICES

1231

is typically pre-conditioned on such a marriage:
the union of the parents must have been legiti-
mized by a customary ceremony and the associ-
ated marriage payments for their children
(typically the sons) to be able to claim rights
to inherit the land of the father.

To sum up, a majority of women are of the
opinion that high brideprices are detrimental
to their interests. Foremost among the reasons
justifying this negative assessment is the belief
or the fear that high brideprices, because they
are a cause of ﬁnancial duress, push men to
blame their wives for the resulting diﬃculties
and to ill treat them as a sort of punishment
or vengeance.

Let us now turn to the opinions expressed by

men (see Table 3).

As expected, since they are on the paying
side, the proportion of men who ﬁnd fault with
high brideprices (more than three-fourths) is
much higher than in the case of women. Also
expected is the fact that by far the most impor-
tant reason for men’s resistance against high
brideprices is the waste of money or the ﬁnan-
cial stress that they involve for the husband:
this reason has been mentioned by 43% of the
total number of men, or 57% of the men who
ﬁnd fault with high brideprices. This said, the
most
instructive ﬁnding emerging from the
table is the following: almost 25% of sampled
men—and almost one-third of those who com-
plain about high brideprices—have spontane-
ously admitted that high brideprices tend ‘‘to
make marriages diﬃcult’’ (10.8% or 14.3%),
alienate women (9.7% or 12.7%), or drive hus-
bands to harass and ill treat their wife (3.6%
or 4.8%). In other words, men themselves are
to some extent aware that women can be
harmed under conditions of duress created by
high brideprices. Presumably, therefore, while
ﬁxing the brideprice for his daughter a man
should think of the negative consequences that
large payments can entail for her future well-
being.

The above evidence suggests that, in numer-
ous instances, brideprices in the Senegal river
valley are high enough to cause ﬁnancial
duress. Unfortunately, we do not have at hand
reliable estimates of
the incomes of our
respondents, yet we can reasonably say that,
on an average, the brideprice does not exceed
more than a few months’ income. These two
facts may seem hard to reconcile but only if
we overlook that the local agricultural econ-
omy still has a large self-subsistence component
and that cash is therefore more diﬃcult to ob-

tain than what might be indicated by income
levels. To put it in another way, the shadow
price of a money unit is considerably higher
than one and the imputed value of the bride-
price is much higher than its nominal value.
Furthermore, it must be borne in mind that
the cash amounts on which our analysis is
based underestimate the genuine extent of mar-
riage payments. This is because such payments
may partly consist of personal gifts made in
kind to the bride or her parents (see supra).

5. A QUANTITATIVE TEST

A rigorous method to test the validity of our
theory of strategic determination of marriage
payments consists of estimating two equations.
In the ﬁrst equation,
the brideprice is the
dependent variable and the expected type of
the groom is among the explanatory variables
appearing on the right-hand side (this is the
strategic relationship expressing how parents
decide the level of the brideprice). In the second
equation, by contrast, the probability of sepa-
ration or divorce is the explanandum while the
brideprice is an independent variable. The the-
ory under examination will certainly be refuted
1° if the brideprice actually paid does not inﬂu-
ence the divorce probability or 2° if the ex-
pected type of the groom does not inﬂuence
the brideprice. Such an econometric approach
has been actually followed in a companion pa-
per (Gaspart & Platteau, 2005), where we show
that the data allow us to reject null hypotheses
that refute our theory. For one thing, the ex-
pected risk of divorce, which stands for the
groom type assessed by the bride’s parents at
the time of marriage negotiations, inﬂuences
the brideprice negatively and,
for another
thing, the brideprice inﬂuences the objective
probability of divorce positively (or the ob-
served duration of the marriage negatively). 13
In this paper, we want to conduct another,
simpler test with a view to demonstrating the
additional insights that can be provided by a
theory allowing for strategic considerations.
This can be done because the alternative theo-
ries under scrutiny yield diﬀerent predictions
that can be submitted to a simple statistical test.
One such prediction concerns the inﬂuence of
education on the brideprice. The standard
neo-classical approach to marriage payments
leads to an ambiguous conclusion. On the one
hand, parents should obtain a higher brideprice
for educated daughters because they are more

1232

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

theory. For

productive and more scarce in the marriage
market. On the other hand, education may be
considered by the groom as an undesirable
attribute to the extent that educated women
are thought to be less committed to household
activities, including care of children (see supra).
In the strategic theory, the eﬀect of education
on the brideprice depends on the type of
marriage, which is not true in the case of the
conventional
love marriages,
arguably, the marginal impact of the brideprice
on the probability of divorce is low so that the
conventional theory more or less applies. As
pointed out above, the net eﬀect of education
is therefore ambiguous. For arranged mar-
riages, the probability of divorce inﬂuences
the determination of the brideprice in a more
signiﬁcant manner. On the one hand, educated
women are better able to exert pressure on their
parents so that their interests, as they see them
from their own standpoint, are duly taken into
account in the course of marriage negotiations.
As a result, brideprices are expected to be lower
for educated women. To a certain extent, it can
be argued that such an eﬀect belongs to the
realm of the conventional theory. What the lat-
ter cannot account for, however, is that parents
anticipating good exit options for educated
daughters in the case of divorce may not refrain
from demanding a higher brideprice than they
would ask for uneducated daughters.

Although both theories predict ambiguous,
albeit diﬀerent eﬀects of education on bride-
prices, the eﬀect may vary according to the type
of marriage if we follow the strategic theory.
Moreover,
it is now a plausible result that,
compared to those for noneducated women,
brideprices for educated women will rise more,
or fall less, in the case of arranged marriages
than in the case of love marriages. What is cer-
tain, however, is that, if we observe diﬀerential
eﬀects of education on brideprices depending
on the type of marriage, they are accountable
by the strategic theory of marriage payments
but not by the standard theory.

As we have argued earlier (see supra, Section
2), the local economy of the Senegal river valley
is poorly integrated with the national economy.
It is, therefore, not legitimate to use a country-
wide price index to deﬂate the nominal values
of the sample brideprices. For another thing,
since there are actually few educated women
in our sample (about 12%), and their education
level is typically low, we measure bride’s educa-
tion by a simple binary variable equal to one
when the bride has completed her primary
school and to zero when she has not. The type
of marriage is, by deﬁnition, another dichoto-
mous variable. The average brideprice amounts
as per each of the four possible combinations of
education and marriage type are displayed in
Table 4, while the results of the statistical tests
(standard chi-square tests and nonparametric,
Kruskal–Wallis tests) for the corresponding
diﬀerences of means are shown in Table 5. Note
that we have removed all the cases where at
least some part of the marriage payment has
been made in the form of cattle gifts.

Because of the above-noted restricted size of
our sample for educated women, we have not
used any control for carrying out the pairwise
comparison presented in Tables 4 and 5. Yet,
robustness checks based on econometrics and
discussed in our
(see
Gaspart & Platteau, 2005) have shown that
available control variables, such as the ethnic-
cum-geographic divides, have inﬂuence neither
on brideprices nor on behavior (e.g., preference
for love compared to arranged marriage).

companion paper

The results of the test clearly favor the theory
of brideprices based on strategic behavior as
opposed to the conventional theory. Indeed,
while brideprices are signiﬁcantly higher for
educated women than for noneducated women
in the case of arranged marriages, the amounts
do not diﬀer in a statistically signiﬁcant manner
when only love marriages are considered.
Therefore, the statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence
in brideprices between educated and nonedu-
cated women when the two types of marriages

Table 4. Average brideprice amounts as per the education level of the bride and the type of marriage

Arranged marriages

Love marriages

All marriages

Noneducated women

Educated women

31,564 CFA

(n = 93)

44,000 CFA

(n = 62)

37,376 CFA

(n = 155)

54,500 CFA

(n = 10)

53,182 CFA

(n = 11)

53,809 CFA

(n = 21)

All women

33,791 CFA

(n = 103)

45,384 CFA

(n = 73)

38,599 CFA

(n = 176)

THE PERVERSE EFFECTS OF HIGH BRIDEPRICES

1233

Table 5. Signiﬁcance tests for the diﬀerences of mean brideprices: parametric and nonparametrica

Pairwise comparison

Chi-square test

Kruskal–Wallis test

Between the two types of marriage
Total
Educated women only
Noneducated women only

Between the two education levels
Total
Arranged marriages only
Love marriages only

0.0038 (S)
0.9278 (NS)
0.0021 (S)

0.0046 (S)
0.0038 (S)
0.3215 (NS)

0.0059 (S)
0.9147 (NS)
0.0052 (S)

0.0117 (S)
0.0199 (S)
0.3132 (NS)

a The sign (S) in the last two columns means that the test is signiﬁcant at 95% conﬁdence level; the sign (NS) that the
test is insigniﬁcant.

are aggregated conceals the fact that no such
relationship exists when attention is focused
on love marriages.

Since we use nominal brideprice data, the
above relationship could be spurious. This is,
indeed, a serious concern in so far as arranged
marriages for noneducated women are, on an
average, older than all other marriages. In or-
der to check whether our main result is genuine
or spurious, we have run the nonparametric test
separately for three diﬀerent subperiods: recent
marriages less than eight years old; marriages
of intermediate duration; old marriages more
than 20 years old. Since signiﬁcances for each
subsample turned out to be strikingly close
to those obtained for the whole sample, we
do not report these disaggregated results here.
The above result, therefore, is not an artefact.
Table 4 also shows that brideprices are signif-
icantly lower for arranged than for love mar-
riages. Such a relationship is directly implied
by our model of strategic determination of
brideprices.
require higher
brideprices from a freely chosen groom’s family
because they anticipate a lower risk of divorce
or because they feel less responsible for a mar-
riage failure, if it ever occurs. This belief is
strongly supported by the evidence at hand:
while 26% of the arranged unions ended in sep-
aration/divorce, this was the case for only 9%
of love marriages in our sample. This diﬀerence
is statistically signiﬁcant.

Indeed, parents

As is evident from Table 4, comparatively
high brideprices for love marriages are only
observed for noneducated women. When
educated women are considered separately, no
diﬀerence is discernible in brideprices between
arranged and love marriages. This ﬁnding is
again in line with the expectation derived from
our strategic framework. As a matter of fact,
women improve their exit option as a result

of better education, yet that improvement is
translated into a higher brideprice only when
the risk of divorce plays a signiﬁcant part, that
is, in the case of arranged marriages.

A last remark is in order. The fact that the
inﬂuence of education is perhaps more limited
than one could have thought (the diﬀerence in
average brideprices between educated and non-
educated women is about 16,000 CFA only)
is not surprising when we bear in mind that
educational achievements remain quite low in
the survey area: very few women in our sample
have completed their secondary school (which
is why the binary variable used to measure edu-
cation just distinguishes between illiterate wo-
men and women who have at least completed
their primary school).

6. CONCLUSION

Marriage decisions are obviously critical
decisions, whether they are made by parents
in the framework of an arranged union or by
the partners themselves on the basis of a love
attraction. In so far as payments are to be made
to render the marriage socially valid and, in
particular, to establish the future rights of chil-
dren to the land assets of their parents, it is dif-
ﬁcult to conceive that they are not the result of
strategic thinking. Thus, the suspicion that, by
requiring a high brideprice for consenting to
give their daughter to a man, parents may cause
her harm in future conjugal life and perhaps
even damage the prospect of a lasting union,
will most likely lead them to weigh the advanta-
ges of a high marriage payment against such a
risk. This outcome is more likely in the case
of arranged marriages because the break-up
of a love marriage is unlikely to be inﬂuenced
by the brideprice and, in any event, the parents

1234

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

would not feel responsible for it. Lower bride-
prices for arranged marriages are a logical
consequence of this reasoning, except if the
wife has a valuable exit option guaranteed,
for example, by a good education.

A quantitative test comparing the brideprices
of educated and noneducated women engaged
in love and in arranged marriages has led us
to the conclusion that the diﬀerences observed
can be accounted by the strategic approach
but not by the conventional theory of marriage
payments. This is a result of the fact that stra-
tegic determination of the level of brideprice

in the case of arranged marriages exhibits some
kind of rationing on the supply side: parents of
the bride, indeed, are unwilling to let the bride-
price reach an arbitrarily high level, even if the
groom oﬀers it, because of the possible adverse
consequences
their
daughter.

that would follow for

Here lies the genuine added contribution of
the strategic approach to marriage payments.
Regarding the decrease of real brideprices over
time in the Senegal river valley, it can be ac-
counted by both the conventional and the stra-
tegic theories.

NOTES

1. Questionnaires have also been administered to 83
men (75% in the middle valley).

2. Thus, when zero or only one head of cattle was given
by the groom to the bride, the average amount of
monetary brideprice is about 40,000 CFA; when two to
four heads were given, the amount falls to about 24,000
CFA; when ﬁve heads were given, it goes further down
to around 3,000 CFA; when 10 heads were given (only
one case in our sample), the cash amount is 15,000 CFA;
ﬁnally, when 15 heads were donated (two cases), no
brideprice was paid in cash.

3. The diﬀerence between brideprices for separated/
divorced women and for women who marry for the ﬁrst
time is not statistically signiﬁcant.

4. When a squared term is added, its coeﬃcient is not
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero.

5. Of course,
it is somewhat inconsistent to apply
IMF statistics to correct for inﬂation while simulta-
neously arguing, as we will do later, that the area is
rather insulated from the wider economy. Unfortu-
nately, since no local deﬂator is available, little can be
done about this. It is worth stressing, however, that
even allowing for a large margin of error in the
approximation of the local deﬂator, we would still
expect a negative real growth of brideprices owing to
the slow increase in the nominal amounts observed
over the long period.

7. On an average, Senegalese men lived two years less
than women during the years 1990–95, compared to
three years less during the years 1970–75 (United
Nations, 1980; UNDP, 1998).

8. This proportion is quite close to the oﬃcial propor-
tion reported for the whole region of Saint-Louis (50%),
which covers the departments of Dagana, Matam, and
Podor (Ministe`re de l’Economie, des Finances et du
Plan, 1992).

9. The reader interested in a formal treatment of the
argument sketched here is referred to our companion
paper in which a game-theoretical model of brideprice
determination is presented that relies on the same kind
of strategic considerations as those used in the present
paper (Gaspart & Platteau, 2005). In this model,
following Manser and Brown (1980), McElroy and
Horney (1981), the family is depicted as a production
that generates a household public good. The
unit
matching issue (who marries with whom)
is not
addressed (see Lam, 1988), and there is no intra-
household bargaining such as has been modeled by
Bergstrom (1996, 1997) and Lundberg and Pollak
(1996), for example.

10. Notice that the ‘‘Rotten Kid Theorem’’ is unlikely
to apply in this case, because of the short temporal
horizon of the bride within her family as marriage
approaches. It is,
indeed, unclear whether she may
expect privately appropriable gifts after marriage.

6. Oﬃcial census-based data also indicate increasing
proportions of unmarried women in the lowest age
categories, but stable or even decreasing proportions of
such women in the highest age categories (which is likely
to be the result of easier remarriages for women).

11.
It may also be noted that an increase in women’s
relative contribution to the household’s (agricultural)
activities understood as an increase in wife’s productivity
compared with the productivity of husband does not
necessarily lead to higher brideprices. When set into a

THE PERVERSE EFFECTS OF HIGH BRIDEPRICES

1235

strategic interaction framework,
the prediction put
forward by Boserup (1970) and Goody (1976) is not
automatically conﬁrmed.

12. Not unsurprisingly, statements regarding the
assignment of actual responsibilities in concrete cases
of marriage breaks up are much less clear than those
regarding the principles governing the obligation of
brideprice repayment. As a matter of fact, there is no
neat relationship between statements about whether the
brideprice had actually to be repaid in past events of a
marriage failure, on the one hand, and statements about
the cause of the failure and who was to blame for it, on
the other hand.

13. There is thus a complex, two-way relationship
between the risk of divorce and the brideprice that needs
to be assessed by resorting to the technique of instru-
mentation. It is not satisfactory, therefore, to look at the
relationship between brideprices and the incidence of
divorce as though it were a simple causal relationship, as
is done, for example, in Schneider (1964) and Ensminger
and Knight (1997) who attempt to directly interpret the
observed negative relationship between these two vari-
ables. In our model, the parents who are in charge of
setting the brideprice anticipate that the probability of
divorce is increasing with the level of the brideprice.
Therefore, for the sake of their daughter’s interest, they
decide to choose a moderate level.

REFERENCES

Becker, G. S. (1974). A theory of marriage: Part II.

Journal of Political Economy, 82(2), S11–S26.

Becker, G. S. (1981). A treatise on the family. Cambridge

MA: Harvard University Press.

Bergstrom, T. C. (1996). Economics in a family way.

Journal of Economic Literature, 34(4), 1903–1934.

Bergstrom, T. C. (1997). A survey of theories of the
family. In M. R. Rosenzweig, & O. Stark (Eds.).
Handbook of population and family economics (Vol.
1A, pp. 21–79). Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Bloch, F., & Rao, V. (2002). Terror as a bargaining
instrument: A case study of dowry violence in rural
India. American Economic Review, 92(4), 1029–1043.
Boserup, E. (1970). Women’s role in economic develop-

ment. London: Allen and Unwin.

Ensminger, J., & Knight, J. (1997). Changing social
norms—common property, bridewealth, and clan
exogamy. Current Anthropology, 38(1), 1–23.

Gaspart, F., & Platteau, J. P. (2005). Strategic behaviour
and marriage payments: Theory and evidence from
Senegal. Working paper, CRED (Centre for Re-
search on the Economics of Development), Univer-
sity of Namur, Namur, Belgium.

Goldman, N., & Pebley, A. (1989). The demography of
polygyny in Sub-Saharan Africa. In R. Lesthaeghe
(Ed.), Reproduction and social organization in Sub-
Saharan Africa. Berkeley: University of California
Press.

Goody, J. (1976). Production and reproduction—A com-
parative study of the domestic domain. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Grossbard, A. (1978). Towards a marriage between
economics and anthropology and a general theory of
marriage. American Economic Review (Papers and
Proceedings), 68(2), 33–37.

Grossbard-Shechtman, S. (1993). On the economics of
marriage: A theory of marriage, labor and divorce.
Boulder: Westview Press.

Jewsiewicki, B. (1993). Naıˆtre et mourir au Zaı¨re. Paris:

Karthala.

Lam, D.

(1988). Marriage markets and assortative
mating with household public goods: Theoretical

results and empirical implications. Journal of Human
Resources, 23, 462–487.

Lundberg, S., & Pollak, R. A. (1996). Bargaining and
distribution in marriage. Journal of Economic Per-
spectives, 10(4), 139–158.

Manser, M., & Brown, M.

(1980). Marriage and
household decision theory—A bargaining analysis.
International Economic Review, 21, 21–34.

McElroy, M., & Horney, M. (1981). Nash-bargained
decisions: Towards a generalization of the theory
of demand.
International Economic Review, 22,
333–349.

Ndiaye, S., Ayad, M., & Gaye, A. (1997). Enqueˆte
De´mographique et de Sante´ au Se´ne´gal (EDS-III)
1997. Ministe`re de l’Economie, des Finances et du
Plan, Direction de la Pre´vision et de la Statis-
tique, Division des Statistiques De´mographiques,
Dakar.

Papps, I. (1983). The role and determinants of bride-
price: The case of a Palestinian Village. Current
Anthropology, 24(2), 203–215.

Quinsumbing, A. R., & de la Briere, B. (2000). Women’s
assets and intrahousehold allocation in rural
Bangladesh: Testing measures of bargaining power.
Discussion paper no. 86, International Food Policy
Research Institute, Washington, DC.

Quinsumbing, A. R., & Fafchamps, M. (2005). Assets at
marriage in rural Ethiopia. Journal of Development
Economics, 77(1), 1–25.

Quinsumbing, A. R., & Maluccio, J. (2003). Resources
at marriage and intrahousehold allocation: Evidence
from Bangladesh, Ethiopia, Indonesia, and South
Africa. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics,
65(3), 283–327.

Rao, V. (1993). The rising price of husbands: A hedonic
analysis of dowry increases in rural India. Journal of
Political Economy, 101(4), 666–677.

Re´publique du Se´ne´gal (1992). Recensement Ge´ne´ral de
la Population et de l’Habitat 1988—Rapport Re´gion-
al pour la Re´gion de Saint-Louis. Ministe`re de
l’Economie, des Finances et du Plan, Direction de la
Pre´vision et de la Statistique, Dakar.

1236

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

Schneider, H. K. (1964). A model of African indigenous
economy and society. Comparative Studies in Society
and History, 7, 37–55.

United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)

(1998). Human development report, New York.

United Nations (1980, 1985, 1997). Demographic year-

book, New York.

