Journal  of  Co-operative  Organization  and  Management  4  (2016)  97–107

Contents  lists  available  at  ScienceDirect

Journal   of   Co-operative   Organization   and   Management

j  o  u r  n a  l  h o  m e   p a g e :  w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / j c o m

Contrasting   innovation   networks   in   smallholder   agricultural   producer
cooperatives:   Insights   from   the   Niayes   Region   of   Senegal
Graeme   Reed∗,   Gordon   M.   Hickey

Department  of  Natural  Resource  Sciences,  Faculty  of  Agricultural  and  Environmental  Sciences,  McGill  University,  Macdonald  Campus  21,  111  Lakeshore
Road,  Ste-Anne-de-Bellevue  H9×

  3V9,  Canada

a

r

 

 

t

 

i

 

c

 

l

 

e

 

i

 

n

 

f

 

o

a

 

b

s

 

 

t

 

r

 

a

 

c

 

t

Article  history:
Received  31  August  2015
Received  in  revised  form  1  September  2016
Accepted  11  September  2016

Keywords:
Smallholders
Organization
Social  capital
Agricultural  institutions
Agricultural  policy
Agricultural  innovation  systems

Despite   growing   support   for   agricultural   cooperatives   as   mechanisms   for   rural   development,   relatively
little   is  known   about   how   innovation   spreads   through,   or   is  created   within,   the   formal   structure   of   a
cooperative.   This   paper   provides   an   ‘inside’   look   at   the   social   relationships   operating   within   two   agri-
cultural   cooperatives   in   rural   Senegal   (one   well-functioning   and  the   other   poorly-functioning),   focusing
on  self-reported   innovation   sharing   and  provisioning   between   members.   Findings   indicate   that   for   both
cooperatives,   innovation   was   predominantly   spread   through   formal   vertical   linkages   (i.e.   between   hier-
archal  representatives),   but   was   signiﬁcantly   controlled   by   key   actors   in   leadership   positions,   resulting
in   large  disparities   in   the   innovation   potential   of   different   cooperative   members.   Social   Network   Analysis
can   help   inform   the   design   and   evaluation   of  agricultural   cooperatives   by   shifting   the   analysis   to  individ-
ual   actors   within   the   formal   structure,   potentially   enabling   new   opportunities   for   enhanced   cooperation
to   be  identiﬁed   and   collectively   strengthened.

©  2016   Elsevier   Ltd.  All   rights   reserved.

1.  Introduction

facilitate 

information  exchange, 

Increasingly,  farmers,  policymakers,  academics,  and  donors
have  been  identifying  agricultural  cooperatives  as  essential  insti-
tutional  vehicles  to 
improve
collaboration,  innovation,  and  market  access  for  smallholder  farm-
ers  (Bernard  &  Spielman,  2009;  Fischer  &  Qaim,  2012).  As  a  result,
cooperatives  have  been  receiving  increased  ﬁnancial  and  other
support  from  development  and  government  agencies  to  facilitate
agricultural  system  innovation  and  poverty  alleviation  (Johnson
&  Shaw,  2014).  On  the  African  continent,  cooperatives  have  been
experiencing  a  revival  on  both  theoretical  and  practical  grounds;
following  decades  of  often  inefﬁcient  and  unsustainable  practices
by  colonial  and  post-independence  governments  (see  Deininger,
1995;  Swinnen  &  Maertens,  2007).  According  to  Develtere,  Pollet,
and  Wanyama,  2008,  approximately  one  in  seven  Africans  now
belong  to  a  cooperative,  with  countries  such  as  Senegal,  Rwanda,
and  Egypt  possessing  membership  rates  of  over  ten  percent.
These  ‘contemporary’  cooperatives  have  been  reported  to  beneﬁt
smallholders  economically  by  reducing  transaction  costs,  increas-
ing  market  access,  and  improving  bargaining  power  (Bernard  &

∗ Corresponding  author.
E-mail  addresses:  graeme.reed@mail.mcgill.ca  (G.  Reed),

gordon.hickey@mcgill.ca  (G.M.  Hickey).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcom.2016.09.001
2213-297X/©  2016  Elsevier  Ltd.  All  rights  reserved.

Taffesse,  2012).  For  example,  Markelova  and  Mwangi  (2009)  argued
that  by  harnessing  collective  action,  cooperatives  could  help  small-
holder  farmers  aggregate  their  surplus  output,  pool  both  tangible
and  intangible  resources,  generate  economies  of  scale  and  scope
in  marketing,  and  strengthen  their  bargaining  position  to  improve
their  place  in  the  market  (Blokland  &  Gouët,  2007;  Collion  &  Rondot,
1998).  Further,  agricultural  cooperatives  can  simplify  marketing
and  values  by  directly  bypassing  intermediaries  and  lowering  hor-
izontal  and  vertical  coordination  costs  (Shiferaw,  Okello,  &  Reddy,
2009).  However,  despite  the  broad  international  support,  aca-
demic  research  on  cooperatives  has  revealed  both  failures  (see  Hill,
Bernard,  &  Dewina,  2008)  and  successes  (see  Bernard,  Taffesse,  &
Gabre-Madhin,  2008;  Okello,  Narrod,  &  Roy,  2011),  raising  ques-
tions  concerning  their  ability  to  facilitate  positive  and  sustainable
innovation  amongst  their  members.

Agricultural  system  innovation  involves  bringing  new  ideas,
practices,  or  processes  into  diverse  smallholder  farming  systems
(Klerkx  et  al.,  2011;  Spielman,  Davis,  Negash,  &  Ayele,  2011).  Such
systems  “consist  of  a  wide  range  of  actors  from  the  public,  private,
and  civil  sector  to  bring  new  products,  new  processes,  and  new  forms
of  organization  into  economic  use,  together  with  the  institutions  and
policies  that  affect  the  way  different  agents  interact,  share,  access,  and
exchange  and  use  knowledge”  (World  Bank,  2008).  In  this  context,
agricultural  innovation  is  not  only  concerned  with  new  tech-
nologies,  but  also  with  alternative  ways  of  organizing:  including

98 

G.  Reed,  G.M.  Hickey  /  Journal  of  Co-operative  Organization  and  Management  4  (2016)  97–107

institutions,  markets,  labour,  gender  relations,  and  the  distribution
of  beneﬁts  (Leeuwis  &  Ban,  2004)  in  order  to  facilitate  joint  learn-
ing,  create  new  institutional  arrangements  and  practices  (Klerkx,
Hall,  &  Leeuwis,  2009;  Sumberg,  2005;  van  Rijn,  Bulte,  &  Adekunle,
2012).  Although  agricultural  innovation  studies  at  the  regional  and
national  levels  are  fairly  numerous  (for  example:  Borda-Rodriguez
&  Vicari,  2014;  Saint  Ville,  Hickey,  &  Phillip,  2015),  relatively  few
have  addressed  the  smallholder  innovation  system  at  its  most  basic
−
level 
  the  producers.  Examples  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa  include
Spielman  et  al.  (2011)  who  examined  how  social  networks  facil-
itate  the  transfer  of  knowledge  between  Ethiopian  smallholders,
and  Raini,  Zebitz  and  Hoffmann  (2006)  who  used  social  network
analysis  as  a  tool  to  detect  disparities  in  information  ﬂows  among
key  agricultural  actors  in  Kenya  in  the  development  of  integrated
pest  management  techniques  for  tomato  cultivation,  as  well  as
others  such  as  Hermans  et  al.  (2013).  With  some  exceptions  (see
Douthwaite,  Carvajal,  Alvarez,  Claros,  &  Hernández,  2006),  few  of
these  studies  have  focused  speciﬁcally  on  how  innovation  spreads
within  formal  institutional  structures,  such  as  agricultural  producer
cooperatives.  In  this  context,  cooperatives  have  been  identiﬁed
as  contributing  to  the  innovation  potential  of  smallholder  farm-
ers  by:  linking  and  bridging  external  actors  (Clark,  2002;  Gouet  &
Van  Paassen,  2012),  articulating  technological  needs  and  demands
for  skills  (Kilelu,  Klerkx,  Leeuwis,  &  Hall,  2011),  and  creating  and
supporting  new  knowledge  (Hall  &  Clark,  2010).

in 

facilitating 

Within  this  discourse,  an  important  knowledge  gap  relates  to
the  activities  of  individual  actors  within  agricultural  co-operatives
(members)  and  their  relative  roles 
innovation
(Markard  &  Truffer,  2008).  Further,  while  a  number  of  studies  have
reported  the  positive  impacts  of  cooperative  membership  using
economic  indicators,  including  farm  income,  farm  proﬁts,  tech-
nological  adoption,  and  market  participation  (see  Fischer  &  Qaim,
2012;  Francesconi  &  Heerinck,  2010;  Shiferaw  et  al.,  2009),  few
have  focused  on  the  social  dimension  of  cooperatives,  including
the  distribution  of  beneﬁts,  social  networks,  and  power  hierarchies
(Develtere,  1994).  In  particular,  social  networks  are  known  to  be
essential  for  smallholders  to  access  agricultural  information  and
innovations  (van  Rijn  et  al.,  2012),  to  manage  risk  and  vulnera-
bility  (Woolcock  &  Narayan,  2000),  and  build  adaptive  capacity
to  withstand  external  shocks  (Brown  &  Westaway,  2011).  Pre-
vious  research  focusing  on  the  social  dimension  of  agricultural
co-operatives  has  generally  identiﬁed  that  social  networks  are
either:  a)  the  product  or  outcome  of  functioning  cooperatives  (see
Majee  &  Hoyt,  2011;  Majee,  2007;  Richards  &  Reed,  2015);  or
b)  a  contributing  factor  to  the  re-popularization  of  cooperatives
(see  Myers,  2004).  However,  recent  research  has  focused  more  on
the  external  organizational  linkages  of  co-operatives  in  the  con-
text  of  innovation  (Novkovic  &  Holm,  2012),  poverty  reduction
(Simmons  &  Birchall,  2008),  and  economic  cooperation  (Muthuma,
2011;  Valentinov,  2004),  but  signiﬁcantly  less  on  the  internal  social
networks  and  relationships  operating  within  and  underpinning
cooperatives.  Recognizing  the  importance  of  this  knowledge  gap,
we  sought  to  explore  how  the  internal  social  organizational  struc-
ture  of  cooperatives  can  inﬂuence  their  ability  to  spread  agricultural
innovation,  focusing  on  two  smallholder  agricultural  cooperatives
operating  in  rural  Senegal.

In  what  follows  we  provide  a  brief  historical  description  of  the
cooperative  movement  in  Senegal.  We  then  outline  our  research
methods,  followed  by  detailed  results  and  a  discussion  of  their
signiﬁcance  for  research,  policy  and  practice.

2.  A  brief  history  of  agricultural  cooperatives  in  Senegal

Agriculture 

important  sector  of  Senegal’s  economy,
employing  approximately  73%  of  the  population  and  comprising

is  an 

16.6%  of  national  GDP  in  2013  (CNCR,  2014).  Smallholders,  who
make  up  approximately  95%  of  the  agriculture  sector  in  Senegal,  are
primarily  organized  into  producer  cooperatives,  which  have  expe-
rienced  a  tumultuous  history  over  the  last  four  decades  (Republique
of  Senegal,  2014).  The  French  colonial  tradition  of  ‘societies  indi-
genes  de  prévoyance’  imposed  centrally-organized  cooperatives  on
Senegalese  smallholders  in  order  to  support  the  growing  of  cot-
ton  and  peanuts  for  export  markets  (CNCR,  2014;  Johnson  &  Shaw,
2014).  The  ﬁrst  leaders  of  independent  Senegal,  Prime  Minister
Dia  and  President  Senghor,  believed  that  the  cooperative  move-
ment  would  transform  Senegalese  politics  into  a  self-managing
socialism  (Fall,  2008).  However,  this  vision  was  not  realized,  with
cooperatives  instead  becoming  state-led  and  externally  imposed
(Sylla,  2006).  In  the  period  following  independence  (1960–1984),
the  government  controlled,  supervised,  and  distributed  agricultural
inputs  and  managed  the  marketing,  storage  and  sale  of  farmer’s
production,  leaving  smallholders  primarily  responsible  for  cultiva-
tion  (CNCR,  2014).  In  1984,  a  radical  change  occurred  in  Senegal’s
cooperative  system  through  the  imposition  of  structural  adjust-
ment  policies  by  the  World  Bank  (Fall,  2008).  The  subsequent  New
Agricultural  Policy  (Nouvelle  Politique  Agricole)  in  1984  brought  eco-
nomic  liberalisation  and  the  introduction  of  an  Economic  Interest
Group  (GIE),  effectively  eliminating  the  state’s  role  in  agriculture
and  ostracizing  many  smallholders  and  their  livelihoods  (Cissokho,
2008).  Despite  the  state’s  withdrawal,  a  number  of  historical  lega-
cies  have  led  to  what  Gellar  (2005)  argued  as  being  “.
.unsuitable
organizational  modes,  governance  rules,  and  regulations”  placed
on  rural  associations,  which  have  generally  been  seen  as  impeding
smallholders’  innovation  capacity.

.

 

 

More  recently,  the  cooperative  movement  in  Senegal  has  experi-
enced  a  revival  in  both  national  and  regional  policy  frameworks.  At
the  national  level,  the  introduction  of  the  Agro-Sylvo  Pastoral  Law
in  2009  provided  both  legal  and  ﬁnancial  support  for  agricultural
professionals  to  organize,  strengthening  agricultural  cooperatives.
Furthermore,  the  recent  amendment  and  adoption  of  the  Policy  for
Cooperatives  in  2010  (Politique  de  développement  coopérative)  has
provided  an  important  update  to  the  previous  1984  Cooperative
Law.  Regionally,  the  Senegalese  government  has  also  supported
negotiations  with  the  Uniform  Act  related  to  the  Rights  of  Coop-
erative  Societies  of  2010  (Acte  Uniforme  Relatif  au  Droit  des  Sociétés
Coopératives)  held  by  the  Organization  for  the  Harmonization  of
Business  Law  in  Africa,  in  order  to  help  bolster  cooperatives  in  the
West  African  region.

3.  Methods

study 

Working  within  a  multiple-case 

research  design
(Creswell,  2013;  Yin,  2003),  we   drew  on  both  qualitative  and
quantitative  methods  to  explore  the  role  of  social  networks  in
agricultural  cooperatives  (and  more  speciﬁcally,  their  impact  upon
self-reported  innovation  and  cooperative  performance).  Adopting
a  mixed-methods  approach  to  data  collection  and  analysis  allowed
us  to  increase  the  reliability  of  our  ﬁndings  through  recursive  data
triangulation  and  methodological  overlap  (Harwell,  2011).

3.1.  Study  setting  and  case  selection

On  the  western  coast  of  Senegal  lies  a  vital  agro-ecological
and  economic  region  known  as  the  Niayes  (Fig.  1).  The  region  is
home  to  approximately  52%  of  the  Senegalese  population  and  pro-
duces  up  to  80%  of  Dakar’s  fresh  agricultural  produce  (Dasylva,
2012;  Touré  &  Seck,  2005).  The  predominant  economic  activity
is  horticulture  production,  with  approximately  98%  of  this  con-
trolled  by  smallholder  farmers  (CNCR,  2014).  As  with  other  parts
of  Senegal,  smallholders  in  the  Niayes  region  face  a  wide  range

G.  Reed,  G.M.  Hickey  /  Journal  of  Co-operative  Organization  and  Management  4  (2016)  97–107 

99

Fig.  1.  Regional  Map   of  the  Niayes  (outlined  in  black).  Stars  indicate  where  data  collection  occurred  and  circles  represent  cities  with  more  than  50,000  inhabitants.  Reprinted
and   modiﬁed  from:  Scott,  Faruqui,  &  Raschid-Sally,  2004.

of  social,  economic,  and  environmental  constraints  to  production,
including  an  inability  to  locate  markets,  a  lack  of  agricultural  credit
institutions  and  high  quality  inputs,  proper  storage  facilities,  and
contaminated  water  from  agricultural  inputs.  Cooperatives  have
subsequently  emerged  as  the  primary  strategy  for  smallholders
in  the  Niayes  to  organize  and  collectively  confront  these  ongoing
constraints.  Our  research  activities  were  focused  on  two   producer
cooperatives  in  the  region,  one  identiﬁed  as  ‘well-functioning’  and
the  other  ‘poorly-functioning’.  These  cooperatives  were  identiﬁed
through  a  joint-ranking  activity  using  key  informants  drawn  from
the  government,  development,  and  civil  society  sectors  working
with  smallholders  in  the  Niayes.  Using  a  list  of  approximately  20
producer  cooperatives,  the  key  informants  collaboratively  ranked
each  cooperative  on  a  scale  from  ‘successful’  to  ‘needs  improve-
ment’  (following  the  process  described  by  Mulhall  &  Taylor,  1998),
subsequently  resulting  in  the  selection  of  a  ‘well-functioning’  (CO-
OP  A)  and  ‘poorly-functioning’  (CO-OP  B)  cooperative.

3.2.  Data  collection

Primary  data  were  collected  using  a  household  survey  and
semi-structured  interviews  with  key  informants  involved  in  coop-
eratives,  development  organizations,  and  government  in  Senegal.
The  household-level  survey  was  designed  based  on  the  work  of
Grosh  and  Glewwe  (2000)  and  Angelson  (2011).  The  survey  was
conducted  between  February  and  April  2015,  with  202  producers  in
total  (136  members  in  CO-OP  A  and  66  members  in  CO-OP  B)  located

in  approximately  17  villages  spread  between  three  different  com-
munes:  Diender,  Thies,  and  Mboro.  The  survey  instrument  sought
information  on:  i)  basic  demographic  characteristics;  ii)  agricul-
tural  activities  including  participation  in  donor-funded  projects,
leading  agricultural  constraints,  and  reason  for  cooperative  adher-
ence;  iii)  social  capital,  including  questions  measuring  levels  of
trust  in  village  members,  leaders,  and  government  ofﬁcials,  propen-
sity  to  collaborate,  information  and  communication  ﬂows,  and
groups  and  social  ties.  We  used  three  questions  to  assess  self-
reported  innovation  and  social  networks:  1)  In  the  last  5  years
have  you  developed  or  adopted  a  new  crop,  a  new  way   of  doing
things,  new  planting  method,  new  pest  management  technique,
soil  or  water  management  or  some  technological  learning  in  agri-
culture;  2)  Who   are  the  persons  who   typically  share  these  “new”
ideas  with  you?;  3)  Who   are  the  persons  with  who  you  usually  share
these  “new”  ideas,  new  ways  of  doing  things,  new  crops  (specif-
ically  related  to  your  farm  or  farming)  that  you  have  adopted?
(Table  2).  An  initial  version  of  the  questionnaire  was  pre-tested
with  cooperative  members  and  back  translated  in  collaboration
with  enumerators  to  improve  clarity  and  reduce  potential  survey
biases.

A  sampling  frame  was  constructed  for  both  CO-OP  A  and  CO-
OP  B  using  a  combination  of  a  stratiﬁed  random  and  snowball
sampling  techniques.  The  primary  reason  for  this  approach  was
that  the  cooperatives  did  not  possess  a  comprehensive  list  of  their
members,  which  prevented  random  sampling.  In  order  to  maxi-
mize  the  representativeness  of  our  sample,  we  selected  households

100 

G.  Reed,  G.M.  Hickey  /  Journal  of  Co-operative  Organization  and  Management  4  (2016)  97–107

Table  1
Individual  level  network  measures  of  social  capital.

Measure 

Description 

Social  capital  advantage

Tie  Strength 

Tie  strength  (Festinger,  Schachter,  &  Back,
1963)

The  intensity  of  relationship  between  two
actors

Centrality 

Degree  centrality  (Freeman,  1979) 

The  number  of  immediate  contacts  an  actor
has  in  a  network,  measuring  local  centrality.

Eigenvector  centrality
(Bonacich,  2007)

The  local  network  of  actors  immediately
adjacent  to  your  focal  actor.

Brokerage 

Betweenness  centrality
(Freeman,  1979)

Measure  how  often  an  actor  falls  on  the
shortest  path  length  between  two   other  actors.

Bridging  ties  (Borgatti  et  al.,  1998) 

Ties  that  bridge  different  social  groups  at
similar  scales  (ie.  Ties  between  villages).

Tie   strength  is  associated  with  bonding  social
capital,  generating  trust,  facilitating
information,  and  providing  social  and
emotional  support  (Bodin,  Crona,  &  Ernston,
2006;  Prell,  Hubacek,  &  Reed,  2009).
Highly  central  actors  possess  various  options
for  receiving  and  sharing  information  and
resources.  It  is  also  associated  with  inﬂuence
and  the  ability  of  an  actors  to  hold  power  over
the  transmission  of  information  (Freeman
1979;  Borgatti,  Jones,  &  Everett,  1998)
Captures  how  well  connected  the  actors  are
and  how  well  connected  are  the  actors  they
have  ties  to  are,  illustrating  their  reach  and
inﬂuence  (Borgatti  et  al.,  1998).  Key  for
information  access  (Banerjee  &  Duﬂo,  2011).
Actors  with  high  betweenness  centrality  are
able  to  not  only  access  diverse  resources  and
information,  but  control  their  ﬂow  between
actors  (Borgatti  et  al.,  1998;  Prell,  2011).
Allow  actors  to  access  diverse  information  and
resources,  increasing  their  opportunities  for
action  (Burt  2012),  innovative  capacity,  and
resilience  (Bodin  &  Crona  2009;  Prell  et  al.,
2009).

from  different  cooperative  sub-villages  proportional  to  the  coop-
erative  population  and  households  representing  both  leadership
and  general  member  roles  in  the  cooperative.  Before  proceed-
ing  with  the  surveys,  the  research  team  contacted  and  met   with
each  cooperative’s  President  in  order  to  introduce  the  team,  the
research  objectives,  and  build  legitimacy  with  the  chosen  commu-
nities.  Stratiﬁed  random  sampling  involved  identifying  potential
sub-groups  (villages  in  CO-OP  A  and  groupements  in  CO-OP  B)  and
then  randomly  sampling  a  representative  number  of  sub-groups
(11  villages  in  CO-OP  A  and  6  groupements  in  CO-OP  B)  using  a
random-number  generator.  Once  the  sub-groups  were  chosen,  the
study  team  contacted  the  local  representative  of  each  village  (by
telephone)  to  organize  a  meeting  and  subsequent  sampling  list.
The  contacted  representative  then  provided  us  with  the  details  of
between  10  and  14  cooperative  members.  Following  a  secondary
check  to  ensure  that  the  selected  participants  fulﬁlled  our  key  cri-
teria,  each  member  was  surveyed  in  the  local  language  (Wolof)  by
one  of  two  enumerators.

including  policy-makers, 

In  addition  to  the  survey,  thirty-ﬁve  key  informant  interviews
were  conducted  using  semi-structured  questionnaires  (Johnson,
2001)  to  help  contextualize  and  triangulate  quantitative  data
ﬁndings  (Freeman,  2006).  Respondents  included  a  wide  range
of  stakeholders 
leaders  of  producer
cooperatives,  producers,  civil-society  leaders,  and  development
practitioners.  They  were  selected  following  a  purposive  sampling
strategy  (Creswell,  2013)  that  combined  snowball  sampling  and
convenience  sampling  techniques.  Interviews  ranged  from  20  min
to  1  h  and  25  min   depending  on  the  participant’s  preference  and
their  level  of  interest.  Each  participant  understood  the  purpose  of
the  research  and  consented  to  be  audio  recorded  (DiCicco-Bloom  &
Crabtree,  2006).

3.3.  Data  analysis

Survey  data  (from  cooperative  members)  were  analyzed  using
Social  Network  Analysis  (SNA)  to  provide  a  more  “holistic  insight
into  the  structure  of  a  system  and  the  interdependence  between
entities”  (Spielman  et  al.,  2011  p.  403).  SNA  draws  on  graph  the-
ory  and  mathematical  modeling  to  investigate  the  social  structures
between  identiﬁed  stakeholders  (Kadushin,  2012;  Scott,  2012)  and

Table  2
Overview  of  name-generating  questions  used  in  the  household-level  surveys.

Relation 

Flow  (Innovation
dissemination)

Questions:

Who   are  the  persons  (relatives,  friends  or
neighbours)  who   typically  share  these  “new”
ideas  with  you?
Who   are  the  persons  with  who  you  usually
share  these  “new”  ideas,  new  ways  of  doing
things,  new  crops  (speciﬁcally  related  to  your
farm  or  farming)  that  you  have  adopted?

has  been  applied  across  a  wide  variety  of  disciplines,  including
sociology,  political  science,  and  more  recently,  natural  resource
management  and  community-based  management  (see,  for  exam-
ple,  Douthwaite  et  al.,  2006;  García-Amado,  Pérez,  Iniesta-Arandia,
Dahringer,  &  Reyes;  Saint  Ville,  Hickey,  Locher,  &  Phillip,  2016).
Sabatini  (2009)  noted  that  the  most  appropriate  network  measures
of  social  capital  depend  greatly  on  the  context  and  nature  of  the
ties  that  make  up  the  network.  Table  1  summarizes  the  measures
we  included  in  our  study,  including  a  description  of  each  measure
and  the  potential  social  capital  advantage  based  on  the  literature.
We  sought  to  address  the  social  networks  operating  within  our
selected  producer  cooperatives  by  focusing  on  self-reported  inno-
vation  sharing  and  provision.  In  network  terms,  this  meant  that  we
focused  on  the  ego-centric  level  of  analysis  by  using  the  perspective
of  a  focal  node  based  on  relations  of  “innovation  shared”  and  “inno-
vation  provided”.  As  our  network  analysis  was   conducted  within  a
formal  structure,  we  deﬁned  the  network  boundary  in  three  ways:
spatially  (within  the  cooperative’s  intervention  zone),  temporally
(at  the  time  of  study),  and  organizationally  (a  member  of  the  coop-
erative).  Network  data  were  analyzed  using  the  software  UNICET
and  NetDraw.

Qualitative  interview  data  were  translated  and  transcribed
in  full  to  enable  content  analysis  (Hsieh  &  Shannon,  2005)  and
constant  comparison  to  identify  and  code  emergent  themes  and
categories  in  the  data  (Auerbach  &  Silverstein,  2003).  Data  were
coded  manually  following  an  iterative  process  that  involved  the
use  of  research  memos   and  quotes  from  participants.

G.  Reed,  G.M.  Hickey  /  Journal  of  Co-operative  Organization  and  Management  4  (2016)  97–107 

101

Table   3
Survey  respondent  attributes  (n  =  202).

n 
Age
18–24
25–34
35–44
45–54
Over   54
Education
No   ofﬁcial  education
Primary  School
Secondary  School
Religious
Superior  Education
Other  (includes  basic  literacy/primary
school  plus  religious  schooling)
Experience
Less  than  1  year
1–2.5  years
3–6  years
7–10  years
Over  10  years
Years  living  in  the  community
Less  than  1  year
1–2.5  years
3–6  years
7–10  years
Over  10  years
Land  size
Less  than  1  ha
1–3  ha
4–6  ha
7–10  ha
Over  10  ha

COOP  A 

136 
0  (0%)
14  (10.3%)
18  (13.2%)
26  (19.1%)
78  (57.3%)

28  (20.9%)
13  (9.7%)
12  (8.9%)
59  (44%)
6  (4.5%)
16  (11.9%)

0  (0%)
2   (1.5%)
2   (1.5%)
2   (1.5%)
129  (95.5%)

0  (0%)
4   (2.9%)
3   (2.2%)
2   (1.5%)
126  (93.3%)

45  (35.6%)
62  (46.3%)
20  (14.9%)
3  (2.2%)
4   (3.0%)

COOP  B

66
9  (14.5%)
13  (21.0%)
11  (17.7%)
15  (24.2%)
14  (22.6%)

8  (12.9%)
17  (27.4%)
7  (11.3%)
20  (32.2%)
4  (6.4%)
6  (9.7%)

1  (1.6%)
1  (1.6%)
5  (8.1%)
0   (0%)
55  (88.8%)

1  (1.6%)
3  (4.9%)
4  (6.5%)
1  (1.6%)
52  (85.2%)

2  (3.4%)
35  (60.3%)
16  (27.6%)
3  (5.2%)  2  (3.4%)

3.4.  Assumptions  and  limitations

Five  critical  assumptions  were  made  in  order  to  assess  innova-
tion  networks  using  the  SNA  approach:  1)  positive  and  negative
social  capital  is  embedded  in  a  cooperative  member’s  social  rela-
tionships;  2)  relationships  that  affect  cooperative  performance  can
be  studied  and  local  actors  are  willing  to  participate  in  a  safe  and
non-threatening  research  environment;  3)  relational  ties  between
actors  adequately  capture  the  channels  that  innovation  (whether
material  or  information)  is  transferred  through;  4)  that  cooper-
ative  members  are  likely  to  know  one  another  thereby  allowing
the  use  of  a  snowball  sampling  strategy;  and  5)  network  struc-
tures  provide  opportunities  for,  or  constrain,  individual  action,  and
adequately  capture  the  patterns  of  relationships.  Furthermore,  we
recognize  the  potential  selection  bias  resulting  from  using  local
leaders  to  help  us  identify  members  and  key  informants;  however,
their  addition  provided  important  local  legitimacy  with  the  poten-
tial  participants  (Scott,  2012).  We   therefore  included  a  secondary
check,  ensuring  that  the  selected  participants  fulﬁlled  certain  key
criteria  such  as  membership  in  our  selected  cooperatives  and  deriv-
ing  their  primary  livelihood  from  agricultural  production  (Johnson,
2001).  Non-response  bias  was  minimized  in  two  ways:  1)  prior
notice  to  survey  participation;  and  2)  revisiting  the  participants
at  a  suitable  time  (as  recommended  by  Dillman,  1991).  Less  than
10%  of  invited  survey  participants  did  not  complete  the  survey.

4.  Results  and  discussion

4.1.  Respondent  proﬁle

Survey  respondent  proﬁles  are  presented  in  Table  3.  Overall,
respondents  from  both  cooperatives  reported  similar  levels  of  time
living  in  the  community  (over  85%  spent  10  years  or  more),  land

size  (65%  possessed  under  three  hectares  of  land),  cultivating  expe-
rience  (over  88%  had  10  years  or  more  of  experience),  and  low
levels  of  education  (less  than  20%  had  undertaken  secondary  school
education).  According  to  Dahkil  and  Clercq  (2004),  low  levels  of
education  can  constrain  the  ability  of  smallholders  to  adopt  techno-
−
logical  innovation  and  access  specialized  training 
  both  of  which
affect  innovation  dissemination  (Klerkx,  Van  Mierlo,  &  Leeuwis,
2012;  Lowitt  et  al.,  2015).

4.2.  Innovation  networks

Social  networks  pertaining  to  innovation  provision  (Q5)  and
innovation  sharing  (Q6)  in  each  cooperative  are  presented  in
Fig.  2a  and  b.  Our  results  show  that  the  ‘poorly-functioning’  CO-
OP  B’s  innovation  provision  and  sharing  networks  (Fig.  2b)  were
dispersed,  highly  centralized,  and  comprised  of  several  cohesive
sub-groups.  Outside  of  three  important  focal  nodes  that  play  bridg-
ing  roles  between  the  sub-groups,  there  is  an  apparent  lack  of
connection,  indicating  a  low  amount  of  group  cohesion  and  a  high
level  of  modularity.  This  type  of  social  network  structure  speaks
to  what  Granovetter  (1973)  denoted  as  weak  ties,  where  sub-
groups  that  possess  high  bonding  social  capital  (i.e.  groups  with
a  homogeneity  of  belief,  location,  and  knowledge),  might  hin-
der  effective  information  ﬂow  across  the  co-operative  group  (Burt
2004,  2009;  Warriner  &  Moul,  1992).  The  apparent  lack  of  con-
nection  between  sub-groups  in  CO-OP  B  potentially  inhibited  the
cooperative’s  group  structure  from  playing  essential  innovation
system  roles  such  as  innovation  intermediation,  bridging  members
to  technical  and  ﬁnancial  resources,  and  sharing  knowledge.  This
is  highlighted  in  the  observation  of  one  interview  respondent:  “The
information  doesn’t  reach  between  villages  because  of  the  problems
posed  by  poor  communication  channels  when  there  is  no  access  to
electricity  or  internet  to  help  spread  information.”  As  a  result,  he  con-
tinues,  “.
.
  This  forces  the  cooperative  leaders  to  share  information
the  ‘old  fashioned’  way,  face-to-face,  which  is  not  always  ﬁnancially
viable  for  them.”

.

 

 

In  contrast,  the  ‘well-functioning’  CO-OP  A’s  innovation  pro-
vision  and  sharing  networks  (Fig.  2a)  exhibited  a  core/periphery
network,  outlined  by  Bodin  and  Crona  (2009)  as  containing  a  set  of
densely  connected  nodes  (the  core)  that  are  equally  well  connected
to  their  periphery  group  (members)  as  their  other  core  nodes.  The
implication  of  this  structure  is  that  peripheral  nodes  often  have
strong  connections  to  their  core  and  adjacent  nodes,  but  rarely
possess  a  link  to  other  periphery  groups,  which  can  lead  to  the
potential  for  ‘structural  holes’  (Burt,  2000).  Structural  holes  occur
when  two  actors  or  groups  (peripheral  nodes)  have  no  direct  con-
nection  between  them,  yet  there  is  a  third  actor  or  group  (core)  that
possesses  ties  to  both  of  them,  creating  a  potential  advantage  for
that  third-party  who  can  broker  the  ﬂow  of  knowledge  and  control
the  interaction  between  subgroups,  thereby  inﬂuencing  the  spread
of  innovation.  Despite  the  possible  negative  implications  arising
from  the  presence  of  structural  holes  (for  an  in-depth  discussion  of
this  see  Burt,  2009),  a  core-periphery  model  is  not  out  of  place  in
a  cooperative’s  hierarchical  structure,  contributing  to  its  ability  to
encourage  innovation.  An  increase  in  horizontal  linkages  between
periphery  members  would  likely  encourage  farmer-to-farmer  con-
nections,  potentially  facilitating  social  learning  and  knowledge
sharing  (Pretty  &  Smith,  2004).

Building  on  these  initial  ﬁndings,  we  now  consider  how  inno-
vation  spreads  in  each  network  and  what  factors  inﬂuenced  this
spread  drawing  on  our  survey  and  key  informant  interview  data  in
order  to  paint  a  richer  and  deeper  understanding  of  both  outsider
and  insider  view  of  the  networks  (Edwards,  2010).

102 

G.  Reed,  G.M.  Hickey  /  Journal  of  Co-operative  Organization  and  Management  4  (2016)  97–107

Fig.  2.  a  Innovation  sharing  and  provision  networks,  concerning  whom  you  receive  knowledge/innovation  from  (Q5)  and  who  you  share  this  information  with  (Q6),  for  COOP
A   (n  =  136).  Colours  represent  sub-group  attribution  (Union-level).  Numbers  represent  individual  members.  Triangles  represent  actors  in  positions  of  power  and  circles  are
general  member.
b  Innovation  sharing  and  provision  networks,  concerning  whom  you  receive  knowledge/innovation  from  (Q5)  and  who  you  share  this  information  with  (Q6),  for  COOP  B
(n   =  66)  Colours  represent  sub-group  attribution  (village-level).  Numbers  represent  individual  members.  Triangles  equal  actors  in  positions  of  power  and  circles  are  general
members.

4.2.1.  How  does  innovation  spread?

Our  results  indicate  that  for  both  cooperative  A  and  B,  inno-
vation  spreads  in  a  predominantly  vertical  manner,  where  highly
connected  actors,  generally  in  leadership  positions,  act  as  inter-
mediaries  between  cooperative  members  and  external  agents  (i.e.

government  ofﬁcials,  development  workers,  etc.).  This  ﬁnding  is
supported  by  the  work  of  Krishna  (2002)  who  found  that  appropri-
ate  agents  are  needed  to  activate  the  communities’  endowments  of
social  capital  to  produce  a  ﬂow  of  beneﬁts.

G.  Reed,  G.M.  Hickey  /  Journal  of  Co-operative  Organization  and  Management  4  (2016)  97–107 

103

The  vertical  nature  of  CO-OP  A’s  core-periphery  structure  was
evident  as  villages  elected  representatives  to  the  cooperative,  who
then  designated  certain  individuals  at  the  cooperative  level  to  act
as  intermediaries  for  the  entire  cooperative.  We   can  see  this  in  the
core-periphery  model  where  core  agents  (leaders)  hold  key  roles  in
the  exchange  of  information  between  other  members.  As  a  result,
CO-OP  A  offered  considerably  more  opportunity  for  information
and  knowledge  exchange  than  the  more  dispersed,  heavily  divided
social  network  structure  of  CO-OP  B.  In  CO-OP  B,  important  bridging
and  linking  actors  that  could  potentially  connect  sub-groups  were
not  present,  limiting  their  ability  to  transmit  innovations  and  gen-
erate  solidarity  between  members.  This  reinforces  the  importance
of  designing  cooperative  structures  that  can  build  bridging  connec-
tions  between  geographically  separate  sub-groups  as  well  as  the
importance  of  developing  linking  connections  to  facilitate  innova-
tion  between  cooperative  members  and  external  agents  (Hussein,
2001)

In  both  of  our  cases,  a  few  key  individuals  can  be  seen  as  broker-
ing  information  transmission  and  thus  innovation  dissemination
within  the  cooperatives.  Drawing  from  organizational  research  lit-
erature,  this  level  of  centralization  can  have  a  potentially  negative
impact  on  innovation  outcomes,  as  it  tends  to  concentrate  decision-
making  power  in  one  location  (Damanpour,  1991).  Often,  more
dispersed  power  is  necessary  to  promote  system-wide  innovation
(Thompson,  1965).  Furthermore,  the  governance  structure  of  coop-
eratives  as  democratic  and  member-driven  generally  requires  that
ownership  rights  (or  the  rights  that  assign  beneﬁts)  not  be  assigned
to  one  person;  rather  they  should  lie  in  the  hands  of  the  mem-
bers  (Bijman  &  Hendrikse,  2003).  This  means  that  more  horizontal
ties  between  the  peripheries  could  potentially  increase  collective
actions  in  support  of  innovation.  Bourgeois  and  Friedkin  (2001)
determined  that  collective  action  between  members  is  substan-
tially  more  likely  between  actors  that  are  in  contact  compared  to
those  that  are  not  in  contact.  Similarly,  Pretty  and  Smith  (2004)
argued  that  agricultural  innovation  ﬂows  and  opportunities  for
social  learning  could  be  improved  by  developing  stronger  farmer-
to-farmer  connections  in  different  communities.  This  suggests  an
opportunity  for  cooperatives-related  policies  and  communication
initiatives  to  better  connect  peripheral  members  to  ensure  that
knowledge  and  innovation  dissemination  ﬂows  both  horizontally
and  vertically  through  careful  design  and  the  strategic  use  of  par-
ticipatory  approaches.

4.2.2.  What  inﬂuences  innovation  spread?

Our  sample  of  smallholders  reported  being  highly  dependent
on  a  relatively  small  number  of  key  actors  (primarily  cooperative
leaders)  for  their  agricultural  inputs,  possible  innovations,  general
information,  and  market  information.  This  ﬁnding  further  attests
to  the  important  role  that  individuals,  and  speciﬁcally  leaders  and
well-connected  individuals,  play  in  the  transmission  and  spread  of
innovation  in  agricultural  systems  (Klerkx  &  Leeuwis,  2009;  Klerkx
et  al.,  2009;  Saint  Ville  et  al.,  2016).  One  potential  strategy  here  may
be  to  develop  greater  linkages  between  cooperatives  and  broader
−
‘innovation  platforms’ 
  deﬁned  as  a  “multi-actor  conﬁguration
deliberately  set  up  to  facilitate  and  undertake  various  activities
around  identiﬁed  agricultural  innovation  challenges  and  opportu-
nities”  (Kilelu,  Klerkx,  &  Leeuwis,  2013,  p.  66).

Qualitative  data  conﬁrmed  the  central  importance  of  social  rela-
tions  (i.e.  whether  or  not  they  were  included  in  the  immediate
friendship  circle  of  members  in  leadership  roles)  in  accessing  inno-
vations,  including  new  agricultural  technologies  and  participating
in  externally  funded  development  projects.  While  our  survey  data
indicated  high  levels  of  support  and  trust  for  village  and  cooper-
ative  leaders  (approximately  95%  of  respondents  trusted  them),
the  interview  data  painted  a  different  picture,  with  some  mem-

bers  citing  these  leaders  as  being  the  root  cause  of  problems  in  the
cooperative’s  function.

If  we   examine  the  network  structure  for  both  CO-OP  A  and  B  in
terms  of  components,  we   can  see  that  the  majority  of  smallhold-
ers  were  linked  only  to  one  another  through  key  actors,  illustrating
the  existence  of  structural  holes  in  the  network  (see  Fig.  2a  and
b).  This  suggests  that  information  and  resources  from  peripheral
actors  (e.g.  average  cooperative  members)  often  needed  to  pass
through  key  actors  to  reach  other  smallholders  and  external  actors.
Management’s  role  in  the  operation  of  cooperatives  is  known  to  be
an  important  factor  affecting  the  success  of  cooperatives  (Eilers  &
Hanf,  1999)  and  this  is  an  area  that  would  beneﬁt  from  further
social  network-related  research  to  better  identify  their  roles  and
reach  in  smallholder  agricultural  innovation  systems,  particularly
in  developing  area  contexts.  In  our  case  studies,  those  who  occu-
pied  leadership  positions  often  possessed  higher  levels  of  education
(ie.  were  able  to  speak  French),  and  had  deep  roots  in  their  com-
munity,  possessing  more  ties  that  enabled  the  linkage  of  otherwise
unconnected  actors  to  each  other,  as  well  as  the  bridging  of  sub-
groups.  Through  the  application  of  an  attribute  analysis  (i.e.  looking
at  network  structure  with  circles  representing  leaders),  we   subse-
quently  found  that  members  with  leadership  roles  were  centrally
located  and  possessed  high  ‘betweenness’  and  density  scores  in
each  cooperative.  Our  qualitative  interview  data  from  both  coop-
eratives  supported  this  ﬁnding:

“The  dirigeants  (managers)  take  what  pleases  them  and  don’t  share
with  the  little  producers” 
“.
choose  what  to  share  and  with  who.

.the  dirigeants  (managers)  have  all  of  the  information  and  they

−
  COOP  B  member.

−
  COOP  A  member

.”  

.

 

 

.

 

 

While  the  centrality  of  leaders  is  not  surprising,  careful  atten-
tion  should  be  paid  to  their  potential  role  in  fostering  innovation
within  cooperatives  (Degenne  &  Forsé,  1999;  Sandström  &  Carlsson,
2008).  Importantly,  not  all  leaders  will  recognize  their  central  role
in  the  innovation  system  without  appropriate  institutional  support
structures.  For  example,  Szreter  and  Woolcock  (2004)  differenti-
ate  between  forms  of  responsive  and  unresponsive  linking  capital,
where  the  latter  tends  to  reinforce  nepotism  and  power  asymme-
tries.  In  such  cases,  Bourgeon  and  Chambers  (1999)  suggest  that
the  organizational  and  governance  structures  of  cooperatives  must
actively  address  inequality,  ensuring  that  all  members  possess  sim-
ilar  bargaining  power.

Despite  our  sample  of  cooperative  members  reporting  partici-
pation  in  annual  general  assemblies  and  occasional  collective  seed
buying  activities,  they  did  not  generally  feel  that  they  played  an
important  role  in  the  cooperatives’  decision-making  processes.  This
ﬁnding  is  supported  by  Iliopoulos  (2003),  who  noted  that  coop-
erative  members  often  have  little  or  no  sense  of  ownership  even
though  they  are,  by  deﬁnition,  the  owners  of  the  cooperative.
Our  interview  data  suggested  that  cooperative  leaders  could  take
advantage  of  this  unequal  power  to  a  certain  extent  by  ﬁltering
information  for  personal  beneﬁts  as  captured  by  this  quote:

“There  are  certain  unions  where  the  leader  manages  everything.
Everyone  and  everything  has  to  pass  by  him.  If  [the  union]  received
support  in  the  form  of  equipment  or  ﬁnances,  in  place  of  sharing
this  information  or  that  money  or  that  equipment  with  everyone,
he  personally  gives  it  out.” 

−
  Development  ofﬁcial

Fostering  broad-based  participation  and  more  democratic
governance  structures  has  the  potential  to  ensure  greater  account-
ability  of  local  leaders  (Rahman,  Sarker,  Hickey,  Haque,  &  Das,  2014;
Rastogi,  Thapliyal,  &  Hickey,  2014)  and  empowerment  of  regular
members,  however  this  is  an  area  that  requires  further  empirical
research.

104 

G.  Reed,  G.M.  Hickey  /  Journal  of  Co-operative  Organization  and  Management  4  (2016)  97–107

4.3.  Innovation  challenges  facing  members

Organizing  smallholders  into  collectives  (including  coopera-
tives)  is  generally  understood  to  improve  market  access  (Devaux
et  al.,  2009),  reduce  the  transaction  costs  of  accessing  inputs  and
outputs  (Markelova,  Meinzen-Dick,  Hellin,  &  Dohrn,  2009),  and
increase  access  to  knowledge  networks  (Herbel,  Rocchigiani,  &
Ferrier,  2015;  Ganpat  et  al.,  2014).  While  this  is  often  the  case,  our
results  indicate  that  this  is  not  necessarily  the  outcome,  supporting
the  view  that  the  success  of  collective  action  in  support  of  innova-
tion  depends  greatly  on  factors  such  as  group  organization,  farmer
and  product  characteristics,  as  well  as  the  institutional  arrange-
ments  surrounding  their  creation  (Markelova  et  al.,  2009).  Drawing
on  both  our  semi-structured  interview  and  survey  data,  we   identi-
ﬁed  three  factors  including  a  lack  of  information,  lack  of  ﬁnancial
capital,  and  a  lack  of  access  to  markets  that  constrain  agricultural
innovation  in  both  of  the  agricultural  cooperatives  we  studied.

4.3.1.  Lack  of  information

Despite  the  formal  structure  of  a  cooperative,  our  survey  data
indicated  that  smallholder’s  innovation  networks  were  divided
signiﬁcantly  along  village  and  union  sub-group  lines.  This  is  con-
sistent  with  Tajfel  and  Turner’s  (1979)  theory  of  Social  Identity,
as  In-Group  and  Out-Groups  were  identiﬁed  between  cooperative
leaders  and  members.  The  majority  of  respondents  who   identiﬁed
access  to  information  and  technical  assistance  as  key  impediments
to  their  adoption  of  new  technologies,  crops,  or  agricultural  prac-
tices  were  women.  For  example,  in  response  to  a  question  asking
whether  they  had  adopted  a  new  technology  or  innovation  dur-
ing  the  last  ﬁve  years  (Q49),  30%  of  responding  farmers  answered
that  they  had  not,  all  of  which  were  women.  For  those  who  had
adopted  a  new  technology  or  innovation  during  the  last  ﬁve  years,
friends  and  family  (55%),  the  cooperative  (18%)  and  the  telephone
(10%)  were  reported  as  being  the  most  important  sources  of  assis-
tance.  This  result  suggests  that  smallholders  are  likely  to  draw
on  their  immediate  social  network  to  access  knowledge  (Lyon,
2000)  and  transfer  agricultural  innovation  (Conley  &  Udry,  2001),
resulting  in  the  potential  for  them  to  become  trapped  in  a  cycle
of  low  innovation  adoption  without  external  intervention.  For  the
cooperative,  developing  communication  strategies  that  put  more
peripheral  members  (smallholders)  in  contact  with  other  mem-
bers  and  outside  technical  resources  has  the  potential  to  yield  more
decentralized  knowledge  networks  (Olaitan,  2006).  One  potential
strategy  suggested  by  a  key-informant  working  in  a  development
organization  was  greater  use  of  community  radio  as  a  decentralized
strategy  to  diffuse  knowledge,  foster  innovation  and  disseminate
market  information:  “With  community  radio,  we  can  distribute  a  lot
of  information,  even  information  not  in  French  but  in  national  lan-
guages  in  order  to  ensure  everyone  has  access  to  the  maximum  amount
of  information.”  This  is  an  area  that  requires  further  research  in
the  context  of  upscaling  and  outscaling  in  agricultural  innovation
systems  (see  Hermans,  Stuiver,  Beers,  &  Kok,  2013).

4.3.2.  Lack  of  ﬁnancial  capital

A  lack  of  access  to  ﬁnancial  support,  whether  in  the  form  of  credit
or  philanthropic  donations,  was  one  of  the  primary  constraints  to
innovation  adoption  reported  by  our  sample  of  producer  cooper-
ative  members.  Importantly,  of  the  26%  of  farmers  who   identiﬁed
access  to  ﬁnancial  capital  as  being  a  key  impediment  to  their  inno-
vation  adoption,  64%  were  female.  Some  interview  data  revealed
that  collective  initiatives  arranged  through  the  cooperative  enabled
certain  groups  of  producers  to  better  access  ﬁnance  for  agricultural
tools  and  equipment.  However,  the  producer’s  ability  to  access  this
credit  and  external  support  (i.e.  from  the  local  development  bank,
Programme  d’Aménagement  et  de  Développement  Economique
des  Niayes)  appeared  to  depend  heavily  on  the  social  connections

they  held.  Findings  from  interviews  and  informal  interactions  iden-
tiﬁed  a  growing  amount  of  inequality  between  cooperative  leaders,
their  friends  (core  actors)  and  other  members  of  the  cooperative.
CO-OP  B  illustrated  this  inequality  particularly  clearly  as  mem-
bers  in  leadership  positions  complained  that  only  8%  of  members
actively  participated  in  the  cooperative  and  its  services,  includ-
ing  receiving  its  beneﬁts.  Part  of  the  reason  for  this  was  a  lack
of  information  (as  explained  above);  however,  a  more  confronting
reason  could  be  the  perceived  disconnect  between  members  (as
participating  actors  in  the  cooperative)  and  the  leaders/central
management  of  the  cooperative.  One  key-informant  outlined  the
importance  of  members  actively  participating  in  the  functioning  of
the  cooperative,  and  made  reference  to  the  potential  ramiﬁcations
of  non-participation:

“The  members  need  to  personally  participate  in  the  functioning  of
their  organisation  to  ensure  that  it  survives.  Unfortunately,  in  most
instances  this  is  not  the  case  as  the  members  have  the  tendency  to
think  that  it’s  the  organisation  (management)  that  will  deal  with  all
the  problems.  For  me,  the  [problem  is]  members  who  participate  in
an  organisation  without  understanding  their  role,  nor  the  operation
of  their  organisation.”

Disparities  in  the  level  of  involvement  of  members  were  gen-
erally  associated  with  disparities  in  their  ability  to  access  ﬁnancial
resources  according  to  our  key  informants.  This  suggests  a  potential
role  for  micro-ﬁnance  institutions  that  can  enable  smallholders  to
access  ﬁnancial  capital  in  an  equitable  manner  (Ellis,  2000;  Lowitt
et  al.,  2015).

4.3.3.  Markets

The  inability  to  access  both  local  and  export  markets  also
emerged  as  constraints  to  agricultural  innovation  within  both  of
our  case  study  cooperatives.  This  highlights  the  importance  of  insti-
tutional  structures  that  can  both  support  innovation  systems  while
also  better  linking  farmers  to  markets  for  their  produce.  For  exam-
ple,  one  respondent  stressed  the  need  for  an  awareness  campaign
advocating  the  beneﬁts  associated  with  eating  locally-produced
organic  foods  in  order  to  help  build  a  market  for  his  organic  produce
−
  an  innovation  common  to  both  cooperatives  we  studied.  Sev-
eral  farmers  described  their  challenge  to  compete  with  imported
products  from  European  markets,  particularly  onions  and  potatoes.
As  onions  occupy  an  essential  place  in  many  traditional  Sene-
galese  dishes,  smallholder’s  calls  for  the  government  to  change
importation  laws  have  been  extensive.  In  one  of  our  interviews,  a
government  ofﬁcial  noted  “.
.
  it  is  difﬁcult  for  agricultural  producers
in  the  region  to  earn  their  living  if  the  market  is  saturated  with  for-
eign  imports.”  The  government  has  begun  to  answer  these  calls  with
increasingly  strict  regulations  to  control  onion  and  potato  imports
in  certain  seasons,  speaking  to  the  important  role  that  formal  insti-
tutions  can  play  in  the  development  of  fragile  local  production
and  innovation  systems  amongst  rural  smallholders  (Hounkonnou
et  al.,  2012;  Shiferaw  et  al.,  2009).

.

 

 

5.  Conclusion

Our  comparative  case  study  indicated  that  knowledge  and  inno-
vation  was  spread,  in  the  formal  cooperative  structures,  through
predominantly  vertical  linkages  where  highly  connected  actors,
generally  leaders,  acted  as  intermediaries  between  high-level  part-
ners  (governments  and  markets)  and  the  cooperative  members.
These  key  actors  were  reported  as  receiving  signiﬁcant  power  from
their  role,  potentially  resulting  in  a  wide  variation  of  knowledge
and  adoption  of  innovative  practices  across  cooperative  members,
due  to  their  ability  to  control  the  ﬂow  of  knowledge.  Our  results
also  suggested  that  individual-level  social  networks  not  only  dif-

G.  Reed,  G.M.  Hickey  /  Journal  of  Co-operative  Organization  and  Management  4  (2016)  97–107 

105

fered  greatly  between  members,  but  also  affected  their  potential
to  access  and  share  knowledge  concerning  innovation.  This  ﬁnd-
ing  challenges  the  notion  that  cooperatives  are  inherently  positive
vehicles  for  innovation  dissemination  (Clark,  2002;  Gouet  &  Van
Paassen,  2012;  Yang,  Klerkx,  &  Leeuwis,  2014),  and  instead  suggests
the  need  to  better  recognize  that  their  function  depends  heavily  on
the  existing  social  capital  of  cooperative  members.  Future  research
into  the  role  of  individual  social  capital  (including  social  networks)
in  the  function  and  performance  of  agricultural  cooperatives  could
help  to  better  understand  the  internal  politics  of  cooperatives  and
how  different  forms  of  power  are  obtained  and  used  to  enhance  the
opportunity  of  different  members.

Our  ﬁndings  support  the  need  for  members  to  have  both  struc-
tured  and  unstructured  opportunities  to  connect  with  internal
(other  members)  and  external  agents,  building  the  social  capital
necessary  to  access  wider  networks  of  information  (Sabatini,  2009).
This  type  of  thinking  may   provide  an  opportunity  for  cooperatives
to  better  intersect  with  agricultural  innovation  platforms  seeking  to
facilitate  forums  for  interactions  that  can  build  trust,  collaboration,
and  networks  between  multiple  stakeholders  in  the  food  system
(Foran  et  al.,  2014).  Through  these  avenues,  new  opportunities  may
be  identiﬁed  to  re-center  cooperative-related  research  on  mem-
ber  dynamics  and  interactions  and  how  the  values  of  “autonomy,
voluntarism,  and  democracy”  in  cooperation  can  be  best  fostered.
Important  considerations  here  include  the  potential  roles  that  agri-
cultural  cooperatives  might  play  in  empowering  disadvantaged
groups  in  rural  landscapes,  such  as  ethnic  minorities,  youth  and
women;  and  confronting  the  basis  for  the  often-negative  local  per-
ceptions  surrounding  cooperatives  and  their  colonial  legacies  in
order  to  collectively  identify  new  arrangements  and  directions.

Following  this  theme,  one  research  participant  likened  the  coop-
erative  model  to  an  instrument  such  as  a  car,  saying  that  it  is
not  the  instrument  in  itself  that  is  good  or  bad,  but  rather  the
utilization  and  exploitation  by  people  that  inﬂuences  its  success
or  not.  This  observation  speaks  to  the  importance  of  regulating
cooperative  identity  and  ensuring  that  all  members  feel  empow-
ered,  which  Alvesson  and  Willmott  (1992)  argued  is  a  “signiﬁcant,
neglected  and  increasingly  important  modality  of  organizational
control”  (p.  5).  In  this  context,  further  exploring  how  social  inequal-
ities  and  gender  differences  between  members  affect  cooperative
design,  direction,  management,  and  performance  in  different  set-
tings  would  be  valuable.  Encouraging  cohesiveness  through  group
activities  of  training,  informal  networking  events  and  education
that  increase  the  number  of  potential  information  and  knowledge
sharing  opportunities  (Scott,  2012)  and  opportunities  for  farmer-
to-farmer  connections  in  different  communities  (Pretty  &  Smith,
2004),  may   facilitate  the  development  of  a  more  discernable  ‘col-
lective’  identity  and  improve  cooperative  activities,  such  as  joint
marketing,  ﬁnancing,  and  political  lobbying  (Woolcock  &  Narayan,
2000).  Ultimately,  there  is  a  need  to  better  integrate  economic  and
social  factors  in  the  analysis  and  evaluation  of  agricultural  coop-
eratives  in  order  to  more  meaningfully  assess  the  distribution  of
beneﬁts  and  the  costs  of  membership,  particularly  in  rural  small-
holder  landscapes  such  as  those  found  in  Senegal.

Acknowledgements

This  work  was  carried  out  with  the  ﬁnancial  support  of  the  Social
Sciences  and  Humanities  Research  Council  (SSHRC)  of  Canada,  the
William  Dawson  Scholar  Award  of  McGill  University,  and  the  Cana-
dian  Association  for  the  Study  of  Co-operation.  The  authors  would
like  to  sincerely  thank  the  research  assistants,  Absa  Kadet  and  Fama
Gueye,  for  their  contribution  to  survey  data  collection  and  transla-
tion.

References

Alvesson,  M.,  &  Willmott,  H.  (1992).  On  the  idea  of  emancipation  in  management

and   organization  studies.  Academy  of  Management  Review,  17(3),  432–464.

Angelson,  A.  (2011).  Measuring  livelihoods  and  environmental  development:  Methods

for  research  and  ﬁeldwork.  New  York.  NY:  Routledge.

Auerbach,  C.,  &  Silverstein,  L.  B.  (2003).  Qualitative  Data:  An  Introduction  to  Coding

and   Analysis.  New  York:  New  York  University  Press.

Banerjee,  A.  V.,  &  Duﬂo,  E.  (2011).  Poor  economics:  A  radical  rethinking  of  the  way  to

ﬁght   global  poverty.  New  York,  NY:  Public  Affairs.

Bernard,  T.,  &  Spielman,  D.  J.  (2009).  Reaching  the  poor  through  rural  producer

organizations?  A  study  of  agricultural  marketing  cooperatives  in  Ethiopia.  Food
Policy,   34(1),  60–69.

Bernard,  T.,  &  Taffesse,  A.  S.  (2012).  Returns  to  scope?  Smallholders’

commercialization  through  multipurpose  cooperatives  in  Ethiopia.  Journal  of
African  Economies,   21(3),  440–464.

Bernard,  T.,  Taffesse,  A.  S.,  &  Gabre-Madhin,  E.  (2008).  Impact  of  cooperatives  on

smallholders’  commercialization  behavior:  Evidence  from  Ethiopia.
Agricultural  Economics,   39(2),  147–161.

Bijman,  J.,  &  Hendrikse,  E.  G.  (2003).  Co-operatives  in  chains:  Institutional

restructuring  in  the  Dutch  fruit  and  vegetable  industry.  Journal  on  Chain  and
Network  Science,  3(2),  95–107.

Blokland,  K.,  &  Gouët,  C.  (2007).  The  farmers’  organization  route  to  economic

development.  In  G.  Ton,  J.  Bijman,  &  J.  Oorthuizen  (Eds.),  Producer  Organizations
and   Market  Chains.  Facilitating  Trajectories  of  Change  in  Developing  Countries.
Wageningen,  Netherlands:  Wageningen  Academic  Publishers.

Bodin,  Ö.,  &  Crona,  B.  (2009).  The  role  of  social  networks  in  natural  resource

governance:  What  relational  patterns  make  a  difference?  Global  Environmental
Change,   19,   366–374.

Bodin,  Ö.,  Crona,  B.,  &  Ernston,  H.  (2006).  Social  networks  in  natural  resource

management:  What  is  there  to  learn  from  a  structural  perspective?  Ecology
and  Society,  11(2),  2.

Borda-Rodriguez,  A.,  &  Vicari,  S.  (2014).  Rural  co-operative  resilience:  The  case  of

Malawi.  Journal  of  Co-operative  Organization  and  Management,  2(1),  43–52.

Borgatti,  S.  P.,  Jones,  C.,  &  Everett,  M.  G.  (1998).  Network  measures  of  social  capital.

Connections,   21(2),  27–36.

Bourgeois,  M.,   &  Friedkin,  N.  E.  (2001).  The  distant  core:  Social  solidarity,  social

distance  and  interpersonal  ties  in  core-periphery  structures.  Social  Networks,
23(4),  245–260.

Bourgeon,  J.  M.,   &  Chambers,  R.  G.  (1999).  Producer  organizations,  bargaining,  and

asymmetric  information.  American  Journal  of  Agricultural  Economics,  81(3),
602–609.

Brown,  K.,  &  Westaway,  E.  (2011).  Agency,  capacity,  and  resilience  to

environmental  change:  Lessons  from  human  development,  well-being,  and
disasters.  Annual  Review  of  Environment  and  Resources,  36(1),  321.

Burt,  R.  S.  (2000).  The  network  structure  of  social  capital.  Research  in  Organizational

Behavior,   22,   345–423.

Burt,  R.  S.  (2004).  Structural  holes  and  good  ideas.  American  Journal  of  Sociology,

110(2),  349–399.

Burt,  R.  S.  (2009).  Structural  holes:  The  social  structure  of  competition.  Boston,  MA:

Harvard:  University  Press.

CNCR.  (2014).  Libérer  le  potentiel  des  exploitations  familiales:  Tenir  compte  des

activités  agro-sylvo-pastorales  et  halieutiques  des  exploitations  familiales  dans  la
croissance  économique  durable  du  Sénégal.  Dakar:  CNCR.

Cissokho,  M.   (2008).  Peut-être,  inch  allah.  Dakar,  Senegal:  GRAD.
Clark,  N.  (2002).  Innovation  systems,  institutional  change  and  the  new  knowledge

market:  Implications  for  third  world  agricultural  development.  Economics  of
Innovation  and  New  Technology,  11(4–5),  353–368.

Collion,  M.   H.,  &  Rondot,  P.  (1998).  Partnerships  between  agricultural  services

institutions  and  producers’  organizations:  myth  or  reality?  Network
Paper-Agricultural  Administration,  Research  and  Extension,  Network.  United
Kingdom),  London:  Overseas  Development  Institute.

Conley,  T.,  &  Udry,  C.  (2001).  Social  learning  through  networks:  The  adoption  of

new  agricultural  technologies  in  Ghana?  American  Journal  of  Agricultural
Economics,   83(3),  668–673.

Creswell,  J.  W.   (2013).  Research  design:  Qualitative,  quantitative,  and  mixed  methods

approaches.   Los  Angeles,  CA:  Sage  Publications.

Dahkil,  M.,   &  Clercq,  D.  (2004).  Human  capital  social  capital,  and  innovation:  A

multi-country  study.  Entrepreneurship  and  Regional  Development,  16(2),
107–128.

Damanpour,  F.  (1991).  Organizational  innovation:  A  meta-analysis  of  effects  of

determinants  and  moderators.  Academy  of  Management  Journal,  34(3),
555–590.

Dasylva,  S.  (2012).  Implementing  a  rainwater  sustainable  control  in

Sahel-feedback  from  Niayes  Zone  of  Dakar.  Journal  of  Environmental  Science
and  Engineering,  1,  27–35.

Degenne,  A.,  &  Forsé,  M.   (1999).  Introducing  social  networks.  London,  UK:  Sage.
Deininger,  K.  (1995).  Collective  agricultural  production:  A  solution  for  transition

economies?  World  Development,  23(8),  1317–1334.

Devaux,  A.,  Horton,  D.,  Velasco,  C.,  Thiele,  G.,  López,  G.,  Bernet,  T., 

.
  &  Ordinola,  M.
(2009).  Collective  action  for  market  chain  innovation  in  the  Andes.  Food  Policy,
34(1),  31–38.

.

Develtere,  P.,  Pollet,  I.,  &  Wanyama,  F.  (2008).  Cooperating  out  of  poverty:  The

renaissance  of  the  African  cooperative  movement.   Geneva:  ILO  &  The  World  Bank
Institute.

.

 

 

106 

G.  Reed,  G.M.  Hickey  /  Journal  of  Co-operative  Organization  and  Management  4  (2016)  97–107

Develtere,  P.  (1994).  Cooperation  and  development:  With  special  reference  to  the

experience  of  the  Commonwealth  Caribbean.   Leuven,  Belgium:  Academic
Publishing  Company.

Dillman,  D.  A.  (1991).  The  design  and  administration  of  mail  survey.  Annual  Review

of   Sociology,  17,   225–249.

DiCicco-Bloom,  B.,  &  Crabtree,  B.  F.  (2006).  The  qualitative  research  interview.

Medical  Education,   40,   314–321.

Douthwaite,  B.,  Carvajal,  A.,  Alvarez,  S.,  Claros,  E.,  &  Hernández,  L.  A.  (2006).
Building  farmers’  capacities  for  networking  (Part  I):  Strengthening  rural
groups  in  Colombia  through  network  analysis.  KM4D  Journal,  2(2),  4–18.

Edwards,  G.  (2010).  Mixed-method  approaches  to  social  network  analysis.

Manchester,  UK:  ESRC  National  Centre  for  Research  Methods  Review  paper
[Retrieved  online  from].  http://eprints.ncrm.ac.uk/842/1/Social  Network
analysis  Edwards.pdf

Eilers,  C.,  &  Hanf,  C.  H.  (1999).  Contracts  between  farmers  and  farmers’  processing
co-operatives:  A  principal-agent  approach  for  the  potato  starch  industry.  In  G.
Galizzi,  &  L.  Venturini  (Eds.),  Vertical  relationships  and  coordination  in  the  food
system  (pp.  267–284).  Heidelberg:  Physica-Verlag.

Ellis,  F.  (2000).  Rural  livelihoods  and  diversity  in  developing  countries.  London,  UK:

Oxford  university  press.

Fall,  A.  S.  (2008).  The  Senegalese  co-operative  movement:  Embedded  in  the  social
economy.  In  Develtere,  Pollet,  &  Wanyama  (Eds.),  Co-operating  out  of  poverty:
The  renaissance  of  the  African  co-operative  movement.   Geneva:  ILO  &  The  World
Bank  Institute.

Festinger,  L.,  Schachter,  S.,  &  Back,  K.  (1963).  Social  pressures  in  informal  groups.

Stanford,  CA:  Stanford  University  Press.

Fischer,  E.,  &  Qaim,  M.   (2012).  Linking  smallholders  to  markets:  Determinants  and

impacts  of  farmer  collective  action  in  Kenya.  World  Development,  40(6),
1255–1268.

Foran,  T.,  Butler,  J.  R.,  Williams,  L.  J.,  Wanjura,  W.   J.,  Hall,  A.,  Carter,  L.,  &  Carberry,  P.

S.   (2014).  Taking  complexity  in  food  systems  seriously:  An  interdisciplinary
analysis.  World  Development,  61,   85–101.

Johnson,  H.,  &  Shaw,  L.  (2014).  Rethinking  rural  co-operatives  In  development:
Introduction  to  the  policy  arena.  Journal  of  International  Development,  26(5),
668–682.

Johnson,  J.  M.   (2001).  In-depth  interviewing.  In  J.  F.  Gubrium,  &  J.  A.  Holstein  (Eds.),
Handbook  of  interview  research:  Context  and  method  (pp.  103–210).  Los  Angeles
CA:   Sage  Publications  Thousand  Oaks.

Kadushin,  C.  (2012).  Understanding  social  networks:  Theories,  concepts,  and  ﬁndings.

London,  UK:  Oxford  University  Press.

Kilelu,  C.  W.,   Klerkx,  L.,  Leeuwis,  C.,  &  Hall,  A.  (2011).  Beyond  knowledge  brokering:
An   exploratory  study  on  innovation  intermediaries  in  an  evolving  smallholder
agricultural  system  in  Kenya.  Knowledge  Management  for  Development  Journal,
7(1),   84–108.

Kilelu,  C.  W.,   Klerkx,  L.,  &  Leeuwis,  C.  (2013).  Unravelling  the  role  of  innovation

platforms  in  supporting  co-evolution  of  innovation:  Contributions  and
tensions  in  a  smallholder  dairy  development  programme.  Agricultural  Systems,
118,   65–77.

Klerkx,  L.,  &  Leeuwis,  C.  (2009).  Establishment  and  embedding  of  innovation

brokers  at  different  innovation  system  levels:  Insights  from  the  Dutch
agricultural  sector.  Technological  Forecasting  and  Social  Change,  76(6),  849–860.

Klerkx,  L.,  Hall,  A.,  &  Leeuwis,  C.  (2009).  Strengthening  agricultural  innovation

capacity:  are  innovation  brokers  the  answer?  International  Journal  of
Agricultural  Resources  Governance  and  Ecology,  8(5–6),  409–438.
Klerkx,  L.,  Pant,  L.  P.,  Leeuwis,  C.,  Cummings,  S.,  le  Borgne,  E.,  Kulis,  I., 

.

.

 

 

.
  &

Senmartin,  D.  (2011).  Beyond  the  conventional  boundaries  of  knowledge
management:  Navigating  the  emergent  pathways  of  learning  and  innovation
for   international  development.  Knowledge  Management  for  Development
Journal,   7(1),  1–7.

Klerkx,  L.,  Van  Mierlo,  B.,  &  Leeuwis,  C.  (2012).  Evolution  of  systems  approaches  to
agricultural  innovation:  Concepts,  analysis  and  interventions.  In  Darnhofer,  D.
Gibbon,  &  B.  Dedieu  (Eds.),  Farming  systems  research  into  the  21  st  century:  The
new  dynamic  (pp.  457–483).  Netherlands:  Springer.

Krishna,  A.  (2002).  Enhancing  political  participation  in  democracies  what  is  the

Freeman,  L.  C.  (1979).  Centrality  in  social  networks  conceptual  clariﬁcation.  Social

role  of  social  capital?  Comparative  Political  Studies,  35(4),  437–460.

Networks,   1(3),  215–239.

Freeman,  T.  (2006).  ‘Best  practice’  in  focus  group  research:  making  sense  of

different  views.  Journal  of  Advanced  Nursing,  56(5),  491–497.

Francesconi,  G.  N.,  &  Heerinck,  N.  (2010).  Ethiopian  agricultural  cooperatives  in  an
era  of  global  commodity  exchange:  Does  organization  form  matter?  Journal  of
African  Economies,   20(1),  153–177.

Ganpat,  W.,   Badrie,  N.,  Walter,  S.,  Roberts,  L.,  Nandlal,  J.,  &  Smith,  N.  (2014).

Compliance  with  good  agricultural  practices  (GAPs)  by  state-registered  and
non-registered  vegetable  farmers  in  Trinidad,  West  Indies.  Food  Security,  6(1),
61–69.

García-Amado,  L.  R.,  Pérez,  M.   R.,  Iniesta-Arandia,  I.,  Dahringer,  G.,  Reyes,  F.,  &
Barrasa,  S.  (2012).  Building  ties:  Social  capital  network  analysis  of  a  forest
community  in  a  biosphere  reserve  in  Chiapas,  Mexico.  Ecology  and  Society,
17(3),   3.

Leeuwis,  C.,  &  Ban,  A.  (2004).  Communication  for  rural  innovation  (3rd  ed.).  Oxford,

UK:  Blackwell  Publishers.

Lowitt,  K.,  Hickey,  G.  M.,   Saint  Ville,  A.,  Raeburn,  K.,  Thompson-  Colón,  T.,  Laszlo,  S.,

&   Phillip,  L.  (2015).  Factors  affecting  the  innovation  potential  of  smallholder
farmers  in  the  Caribbean  Community.  Regional  Environmental  Change,  15(7),
1367–1377.

Lyon,  F.  (2000).  Trust,  networks  and  norms:  The  creation  of  social  capital  in

agricultural  economies  in  Ghana.  World  Development,  28(4),  663–681.

Majee,  W.,   &  Hoyt,  A.  (2011).  Cooperatives  and  community  development:  A

perspective  on  the  use  of  cooperatives  in  development.  Journal  of  Community
Practice,   19(1),  48–61.

Majee,  W.,   2007.  Cooperatives  and  the  creation  of  social  capital:  The  case  of  Caring

Home  Services  (Doctoral  dissertation)  Retrieved  from  ProQuest.  (UMI
3294049).

Gellar,  S.  (2005).  Democracy  in  Senegal:  Tocquevillian  analytics  in  africa.  New  York:

Markard,  J.,  &  Truffer,  B.  (2008).  Technological  innovation  systems  and  the

NY:  Palgrave  Macmillan.

Gouet,  C.,  &  Van  Paassen,  A.  (2012).  Smallholder  marketing  cooperatives  and

smallholders’  market  access:  Lessons  learned  from  the  actors  involved.  The
Journal  of  Agricultural  Education  and  Extension,  18(4),  369–385.

multi-level  perspective:  Towards  an  integrated  framework.  Research  Policy,
37(4),   596–615.

Markelova,  H.,  &  Mwangi,  E.  (2009).  Collective  action  and  property  rights:  A  review

of   methods  and  approaches.  Development  Policy  Review,  27(3),  307–331.

Granovetter,  M.   S.  (1973).  The  strength  of  weak  ties.  American  Journal  of  Sociology,

Markelova,  H.,  Meinzen-Dick,  R.,  Hellin,  J.,  &  Dohrn,  S.  (2009).  Collective  action  for

78,   1360–1380.

Grosh,  M.,  &  Glewwe,  P.  (2000).  .  Designing  household  survey  questionnaires  for

developing  countries:  Lessons  from  15  years  of  the  living  standards  measurement
study  (Vol.  2)  Washington,  DC:  World  Bank.

Hall,  A.,  &  Clark,  N.  (2010).  What  do  complex  adaptive  systems  look  like  and  what

are  the  implications  for  innovation  policy?  Journal  of  International
Development,  22(3),  308–324.

Harwell,  M.   R.  (2011).  Research  design  in  qualitative/quantitative/mixed  methods.
In   C.  F.  Conrad,  &  R.  C.  Serlin  (Eds.),  The  Sage  handbook  for  research  in  education
(2nd  ed.,  Vol.  2,  pp.  147–164).  Los  Angeles,  CA:  Sage  Publications.

Herbel,  D.,  Rocchigiani,  M.,   &  Ferrier,  C.  (2015).  The  role  of  the  social  and

organisational  capital  in  agricultural  co-operatives’  development  Practical
lessons  from  the  CUMA  movement.  Journal  of  Co-operative  Organization  and
Management,   3(1),  24–31.

Hermans,  F.,  Stuiver,  M.,   Beers,  P.  B.,  &  Kok,  K.  (2013).  The  distribution  of  roles  and

functions  for  upscaling  and  outscaling  innovations  in  agricultural  innovation
systems.  Agricultural  Systems,  115,  117–128.

Hill,  R.  V.,  Bernard,  T.,  &  Dewina,  R.  (2008).  Cooperative  behavior  in  rural  uganda:

Evidence  from  the  Uganda  national  household  survey  2005.  background  paper  no.
2.   Washington,  US:  International  Food  Policy  Research  Institute  [Retrieved
from:].  http://dspace.africaportal.org/jspui/bitstream/123456789

Hounkonnou,  D.,  Kossou,  D.,  Kuyper,  T.  W.,   Leeuwis,  C.,  Nederlof,  E.  S.,  Röling,  N., 

.
.
&   van  Huis,  A.  (2012).  An  innovation  systems  approach  to  institutional  change:
Smallholder  development  in  West  Africa.  Agricultural  Systems,  108,  74–83.

.

 

 

smallholder  market  access.  Food  Policy,  34(1),  1–7.

Mulhall,  A.,  &  Taylor,  P.  (1998).  Using  participatory  research  methods  to  explore

the  learning  environment  of  rural  primary  school  pupils.  PLA  Notes,  33,   11–16.

Muthuma,  E.  W.   (2011).  Economic  cooperation  in  Kenyan  credit  cooperatives:

Exploring  the  role  of  social  capital  and  institutions.  Johannesburg:  Doctoral
dissertation,  University  of  the  Witwatersrand.

Myers,  A.  (2004).  Old  Concepts  Revisited:  Are  cooperatives  the  way  forward  for

smallholder  farmers  to  engage  in  international  trade.  London:  London  School  of
Economics  &  Political  Science.

Novkovic,  S.,  &  Holm,  W.   (2012).  Co-operative  networks  as  a  source  of

organizational  innovation.  Co-operative  Management,  6(1.1),  51–60.

Okello,  J.  J.,  Narrod,  C.  A.,  &  Roy,  D.  (2011).  Export  standards,  market  institutions

and   smallholder  farmer  exclusion  from  fresh  export  vegetable  high  value
chains:  Experiences  from  Ethiopia,  Kenya  and  Zambia.  Journal  of  Agricultural
Science,   3(4),  188–195.

Olaitan,  D.  (2006).  Finance  for  small  and  medium  enterprises:  Nigeria’s

agricultural  credit  guarantee  scheme  fund.  Journal  of  International  Farm
Management,   3(2),  30–38.

Prell,  C.,  Hubacek,  K.,  &  Reed,  M.   (2009).  Stakeholder  analysis  and  social  network

analysis  in  natural  resource  management.  Society  and  Natural  Resources,   22(6),
501–518.

Prell,  C.  (2011).  Social  network  analysis:  History,  theory  and  methodology.  London,

UK:  Sage.

Pretty,  J.,  &  Smith,  D.  (2004).  Social  capital  in  biodiversity  conservation  and

Hsieh,  H.  F.,  &  Shannon,  S.  E.  (2005).  Three  approaches  to  qualitative  content

management.  Conservation  Biology,  18(3),  631–638.

analysis.  Qualitative  Health  Research,  15(9),  1277–1288.

Hussein,  K.  (2001).  Producer  organizations  and  agricultural  technology  in  West

Africa:  Institutions  that  give  farmers  a  voice.  Development,  44(4),  61–66.

Iliopoulos,  C.  (2003).  Vertical  integration,  contracts,  and  the  theory  of  the

cooperative  organization.  Paper  presented  at  the  Conference:  Vertical  Markets
and  Cooperative  Hierarchies.  In  The  role  of  cooperatives  in  the  international
agri-Food  industry  [Retrieved  from:].  http://s3.  amazonaws.com/academia.edu.
documents/30268617/Iliopoulos-EURESCO-2003.  pdf

Rahman,  H.  M.   T.,  Sarker,  S.  K.,  Hickey,  G.  M.,   Haque,  M.   M.,   &  Das,  N.  (2014).

Informal  institutional  responses  to  government  interventions:  Lessons  from
Madhupur  National  Park,  Bangladesh.  Environmental  Management,  54(5),
1175–1189.

Raini,  R.  K.,  Zebitz,  C.,  &  Hoffmann,  V.  (2006).  Social  network  analysis  as  an  analytic

tool  within  integrated  pest  management  (IPM)  stakeholders”  practices.  In
Paper  presented  at  the  workshop  on  resource,  livelihood  management,  reforms,
and  processes  of  structural  change  (pp.  18–23).

G.  Reed,  G.M.  Hickey  /  Journal  of  Co-operative  Organization  and  Management  4  (2016)  97–107 

107

Rastogi,  A.,  Thapliyal,  S.,  &  Hickey,  G.  M.   (2014).  Community  action  and  tiger

conservation:  Assessing  the  role  of  social  capital.  Society  &  Natural  Resources,
27(12),   1271–1287.

République  du  Sénégal.  (2014).  Programme  d’Accélération  de  la  Cadence  de

l’Agriculture  Sénégalaise:  Les  priorités  a  l’horizon  2017.  Dakar:  Ministère  de
l’Agriculture  et  de  l’Equipment  Rurale.

Richards,  A.,  &  Reed,  J.  (2015).  Social  capital’s  role  in  the  development  of

volunteer-led  cooperatives.  Social  Enterprise  Journal,  11(1),  4–23.

Sabatini,  F.  (2009).  Social  capital  as  social  networks:  A  new  framework  for

measurement  and  an  empirical  analysis  of  its  determinants  and  consequences.
The  Journal  of  Socio-Economics,  38(3),  429–442.

Saint  Ville,  A.  S.,  Hickey,  G.  M.,   Locher,  U.,  &  Phillip,  L.  E.  (2016).  Exploring  the  role
of   social  capital  in  inﬂuencing  knowledge  ﬂows  and  innovation  in  smallholder
farming  communities  in  the  Caribbean.  Food  Security,  8(3),  535–549.

Saint  Ville,  A.,  Hickey,  G.  M.,   &  Phillip,  L.  E.  (2015).  Addressing  food  and  nutrition

insecurity  in  the  Caribbean  through  domestic  smallholder  farming  system
innovation.  Regional  Environmental  Change,  15(7),  1325–1339.

Sandström,  A.,  &  Carlsson,  L.  (2008).  The  performance  of  policy  networks:  The

relation  between  network  structure  and  network  performance.  Policy  Studies
Journal,   36(4),  497–524.

Scott,  C.  A.,  Faruqui,  N.  I.,  &  Raschid-Sally,  L.  (2004).  1.  wastewater  use  in  irrigated

agriculture:  Management  challenges  in  developing  countries.  CAB
International.,  http://dx.doi.org/10.1079/9780851998237.0001

Scott,  J.  (2012).  Social  network  analysis.  London,  UK:  Sage.
Shiferaw,  B.  A.,  Okello,  J.,  &  Reddy,  R.  V.  (2009).  Adoption  and  adaptation  of  natural

resource  management  innovations  in  smallholder  agriculture:  Reﬂections  on
key  lessons  and  best  practices.  Environment  Development  and  Sustainability,
11(3),  601–619.

Simmons,  R.,  &  Birchall,  J.  (2008).  The  role  of  co-operatives  in  poverty  reduction:

Network  perspectives.  London:  London  School  of  Economics  (LSE).

Spielman,  D.  J.,  Davis,  K.,  Negash,  M.,   &  Ayele,  G.  (2011).  Rural  innovation  systems

and  networks:  Findings  from  a  study  of  Ethiopian  smallholders.  Agriculture  and
Human  Values,   28(2),  195–212.

Sumberg,  J.  (2005).  Systems  of  innovation  theory  and  the  changing  architecture  of

agricultural  research  in  Africa.  Food  Policy,   30(1),  21–41.

Swinnen,  J.  F.,  &  Maertens,  M.   (2007).  Globalization,  privatization,  and  vertical
coordination  in  food  value  chains  in  developing  and  transition  countries.
Agricultural  Economics,   37(s1),  89–102.

Sylla,  Y.  (2006).  Note  technique  sur  les  enjeux  sociaux  et  économiques  des

coopératives  d’habitat  au  Sénégal,  Document  multi  graphie´ı,  BS/OAP.  Senegal:
Ministry  of  Agriculture.

Szreter,  S.,  &  Woolcock,  M.   (2004).  Health  by  association?  Social  capital,  social
theory,  and  the  political  economy  of  public  health.  International  Journal  of
Epidemiology,  33(4),  650–667.

Tajfel,  H.,  &  Turner,  J.  C.  (1979).  An  integrative  theory  of  intergroup  conﬂict.  The

Social  Psychology  of  Intergroup  Relations,  33(47),  74.

Thompson,  V.  A.  (1965).  Bureaucracy  and  innovation.  Administrative  Science

Quarterly,   1–20.

Touré,  O.,  &  Seck,  S.  (2005).  Family  and  commercial  farming  in  the  Niayes  area  of

Senegal.   International  Institute  for  Environment  and  Development  [Drylands
Programme  Issue  Paper  no.  133].

Valentinov,  V.  L.  (2004).  Toward  a  social  capital  theory  of  cooperative  organization.

Journal  of  Cooperative  Studies,  37(3),  5–20.

Warriner,  G.  K.,  &  Moul,  T.  M.   (1992).  Kinship  and  personal  communication

network  inﬂuences  on  the  adoption  of  agriculture  conservation  technology.
Journal  of  rural  studies,   8(3),  279–291.

Woolcock,  M.,   &  Narayan,  D.  (2000).  Social  capital:  Implications  for  development

theory,  research  and  policy.  The  World  Bank  Research  Observer,  15(2),  225–249.

World  Bank.  (2008).  Agricultural  innovation  systems:  From  diagnostics  toward
operational  practices.  Washington,  DC:  Agriculture  &  Rural  Development
Department  [World  Bank].

Yang,  H.,  Klerkx,  L.,  &  Leeuwis,  C.  (2014).  Functions  and  limitations  of  farmer

cooperatives  as  innovation  intermediaries:  Findings  from  China.  Agricultural
Systems,   127,  115–125.

Yin,  R.  (2003).  Case  study  research:  Design  and  methods.  London,  UK:  Sage

Publications.

van  Rijn,  F.,  Bulte,  E.,  &  Adekunle,  A.  (2012).  Social  capital  and  agricultural
innovation  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa.  Agricultural  Systems,  108,  112–122.

