World Development Vol. 74, pp. 437–452, 2015
0305-750X/Ó 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

www.elsevier.com/locate/worlddev

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2015.05.011

Women Leaders and Social Performance: Evidence

from Financial Cooperatives in Senegal

ANAI¨S PE´ RILLEUX a and ARIANE SZAFARZ b,*

a Universite´ Catholique de Louvain (UCL), IRES, CIRTES, and CERMi, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium

b Universite´ Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), SBS-EM, CEB, and CERMi, Brussels, Belgium

Summary. — How do women leaders such as board members and top managers inﬂuence the social performance of organizations? This
paper addresses the question by exploiting a unique database from a Senegalese network of 36 ﬁnancial cooperatives. We scrutinize the
loan-granting decisions, made jointly by the locally elected board and the top manager assigned by the central union of the network. Our
ﬁndings are threefold. First, female-dominated boards favor social orientation. Second, female managers tend to align their strategy with
local boards’ preferences. Third, the central union tends to assign male managers to female-dominated boards, probably to curb the
boards’ social orientation.
Ó 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Key words — gender, leadership, governance, microﬁnance, Africa, Senegal

1. INTRODUCTION

This paper investigates how women leaders such as elected
board members and top managers inﬂuence the social perfor-
mance of organizations. Worldwide, both the percentage of
women sitting on corporate boards and the proportion of
female top managers are still well below the share of women
in the workforce. This
even within the
female-oriented not-for-proﬁt sector. Although female partic-
ipation in leadership roles is often advocated as a signiﬁcant
driver of performance in for-proﬁt ﬁrms (Krishnan & Park,
2005; Smith, Smith, & Verner, 2006), the way women leaders
inﬂuence social performance in not-for-proﬁt and hybrid orga-
nizations is poorly elucidated. We address this issue by
exploiting a detailed database compiled from ﬁnancial cooper-
atives in Senegal.

case

the

is

Financial cooperatives are hybrid organizations combining
banking activities with democratic governance. 1 This unusual
combination creates potential trade-oﬀs between ﬁnancial and
social objectives and makes ﬁnancial cooperatives fertile
ground for examining the behavior of women in leadership
positions. On the one hand,
is
male-dominated and plagued by gender stereotypes (Ogden,
McTavish, & McKean, 2006; Petit, 2007); and women access
(O¨ zbilgin &
hardly any leadership positions
Woodward, 2004). On the other hand, organizations beneﬁt-
ting from internal democracy are more open-minded toward
female leaders. Gender imbalances in top management also
exist in not-for-proﬁt and hybrid organizations but are less
pronounced than in for-proﬁts (Lyon & Humbert, 2012).

the ﬁnancial

in banks

sector

For corporate governance scholars, ﬁnancial cooperatives
are attractive targets of study since they are made of several
entities sharing the same business activity and governance fea-
tures (Jones & Kalmi, 2015). Typically, ﬁnancial cooperatives
are organized into networks of local cooperatives (LCs) placed
under the umbrella of a central union (CU). While the level of
centralization varies across networks, the common structure of
LCs involves democratically elected boards and similar staﬀ
hierarchy and employment conditions. From a statistical view-
point, this conﬁguration produces a sample made up naturally
of similarly structured organizations, and so constitutes an

437

asset for analyzing and comparing the behavior of economic
agents in leadership positions, including from the gender per-
spective.

to

and

their

ability

The unique democratic nature of cooperatives makes it pos-
sible to identify the impact of women conditionally on their
place in the decision-making structure of the organization.
As stressed by Das (2014), there might be a gap between
women’s motivation
aﬀect
decision-making. In cooperatives, two types of leaders coexist:
the ﬁrst group is made up of elected board members who need
to please their voters in order to get re-elected; the second
includes professional top managers. The interests of these
two groups of stakeholders are not necessarily aligned. Typi-
cally, the literature examines the inﬂuences of the two groups
of female leaders separately. Scrutinizing their interactions, we
acknowledge that gendered action is partly shaped by institu-
tional constraints and hierarchies (Boehe & Cruz, 2013;
Goldman & Little, 2015; Razavi, 1997), and by gender
inequality in social institutions (Branisa, Klasen, & Ziegler,
2013; Teasdale, McKay, Phillimore, & Teasdale, 2011).

Women are known to diﬀer from men in their leadership
style. They tend to adopt a more participative, less directive
style than their male counterparts (Eagly & Johnson, 1990).
Moreover, gender diﬀerences are sensitive to the type of orga-
nization and the subordinates’ gender (Cuadrado, Navas,

* The authors thank Leif Beisland, Pascaline Dupas, Supriya Garikipati,
Isabelle Gue´rin, Valentina Hartarska, Marek Hudon, Susan Johnson,
Marc Labie, Robert Lensink, Roy Mersland, Kim Oosterlinck, and the
participants in the Third European Research Conference on Microﬁnance
(Kristiansand, June 2013), the Economics Seminar at Auburn University
(September 2013), the CSWEP-sponsored session at the ASSA meetings
(Philadelphia, January 2014), and the International Research Workshop
on Microﬁnance Management and Governance (Colombo, April 2014) for
valuable comments. This research has been carried out through an
Interuniversity Attraction Pole on Social Enterprise (SOCENT) funded by
the Belgian Science Policy Oﬃce. Anaı¨s Pe´rilleux has beneﬁted from a
postdoctoral grant from the AXA Research Fund. The authors are
grateful
to UM-PAMECAS for providing the data. Final revision
accepted: May 18, 2015.

438

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

than in strategic

Ferrer, & Morales, 2012). Although ﬁnancial cooperatives are
particularly appropriate for addressing the attitude of women
leaders, few papers take that stance, probably because exhaus-
tive micro-data are hard to obtain. 2 Exceptions include
McKillop, Briscoe, McCarthy, Ward, and Ferguson (2003),
who analyze the impact of female participation in Irish ﬁnan-
cial cooperatives. The authors provide evidence of male pre-
dominance in governance bodies. Women are more present
in member-interface positions
and
top-management ones. These results are in line with the gender
imbalance observed in democratic institutions by Heenan and
McLaughlin (2002). Closer to our topic, Mayoux (2001) stud-
ies a Cameroonian network of 22 local LCs. She ﬁnds the
majority of savers are female whereas women are underrepre-
sented in the governance bodies. Concurrently, female savings
are recycled into low-interest loans made to men. The author
also points out that women leaders sometimes contribute to
gender inequalities. However, the evidence rests upon two
female-governed LCs only. By working with a larger network
and using time variations of both the composition of the LCs’
governing bodies and the characteristics of the loans granted,
we deliver a more nuanced—and likely more robust—picture.
The network studied in this paper, Union des Mutuelles du
Partenariat pour la Mobilisation de l’Epargne et du Cre´dit au
Se´ ne´gal (UM-PAMECAS), is one of the largest microﬁnance
institutions (MFIs) in West Africa. It consists of 36 LCs
grouped under
In each LC,
loan-granting decisions are made jointly by the locally elected
board members and the top manager, whose career is super-
vised by the CU. Our exceptionally rich panel database allows
us to separately evaluate the social performance of board
members and top managers. In line with the microﬁnance lit-
erature, we measure social performance by means of average
loan size and percentage of
female borrowers (Hermes,
Lensink, & Meesters, 2011). Our ﬁndings are threefold. First,
female-dominated
in
loan-granting. This result is in line with previous evidence
on female participation in democratic governance in India
(Beaman, Duﬂo, Pande, & Topalova, 2011). Second, female
top managers are not necessarily more socially oriented than
their male colleagues. Instead, they tend to align their objec-
tives on those of the local board, even though their superiors
are based at the CU. By prioritizing consensus with board
members over social performance, female managers adopt a
more democratic behavioral pattern than their male counter-
parts. Third, the CU tends to send male managers to LCs with
female-dominated boards. We interpret this as evidence that
the CU management aims to curb social biases that might hin-
der the consolidated ﬁnancial situation of the network. Over-
all, gender is a key factor in considering social performance,
but gender interactions appear far more complex than previ-
ously thought.

the authority of a CU.

orientation

boards

favor

social

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2
depicts the situation of ﬁnancial cooperatives in Senegal. Sec-
tion 3 reviews the literature on gender and leadership, with a
special focus on developing countries. Section 4 introduces
the methodology. Section 5 presents the data, discusses the
results, and conducts robustness checks. Section 6 concludes.

2. CONTEXT

Throughout the developing world, ﬁnancial cooperatives
contribute to female access to ﬁnancial services. 3 According
to Fletschner (2009), of the three major sources of credit in
rural Eastern Paraguay (State banks, wholesalers, and ﬁnan-

cial cooperatives), only ﬁnancial cooperatives serve women.
Likewise, Boucher, Barham, and Branch (1993) ﬁnd that Gua-
temalan credit unions do not suﬀer from major gender biases,
in contrast to other ﬁnancial institutions, both in Guatemala
and worldwide.

Gender inequalities in West Africa are lower than in the rest
of the developing world (Deaton, 1997). Senegalese women
increasingly engage in economic activities (Gue´rin, 2008) and
control their own incomes (Howson, 2013) while remaining
subordinate to men. 4 They are mainly involved in small busi-
nesses, and they run about one-third of informal-sector activ-
ities. Senegalese women are ﬁnancially active (Lyons &
Snoxell, 2005). They routinely participate in traditional rotat-
ing savings and credit associations (ROSCAs), which enable
them to borrow and save small amounts of cash. 5 ROSCAs
reinforce social capital among members. They also act as an
insurance mechanism against ﬁnancial distress since the mem-
bers help each other in case of emergency. However, this trend
toward economic empowerment is associated with an increase
in intra-household tensions (Perry, 2005; Sow, 2003). In addi-
tion, customary patriarchal norms exclude women from access
to both property and formal ﬁnancial services (Gue´rin, 2008;
Noponen, 1991).

In 1983 the Senegalese government introduced a speciﬁc
legal status for cooperatives to democratize their structure
and empower female members. But the impact of this status
is mixed. On the one hand, traditional cooperatives active in
agriculture are mostly male-led. As put by Creevey (1991, p.
353), “By law, women may join the cooperatives but, in prac-
tice, they seldom do.” On the other hand, a new generation of
ﬁnancial cooperatives 6 emerged in the wake of the microﬁ-
nance movement. These organizations pay special attention
to women, providing them with speciﬁc credit services such
as micro-loans and micro-savings opportunities. One of the
leading members of this movement is UM-PAMECAS.

The situation of microﬁnance is common to all member
states of the West African Economic and Monetary Union
(WAEMU). 7 In the late 1980’s and early 1990’s, the region
experienced a major economic and banking crisis (Seck,
2013). In response, the banking sector was restructured and
liberalized, including the closure of public development banks,
which had been a failure (BCEAO, 2012). As a result, credit to
rural areas and to small and medium enterprises dropped dras-
tically, prompting international NGOs to promote microﬁ-
nance projects. In June 1992, the WAEMU central bank,
BCEAO, and the Canadian institution De´veloppement Interna-
tional Desjardins (DID), 8 together launched the PARMEC
project 9 for the development of microﬁnance in West Africa.
In December 1993, the resulting PARMEC law was enacted
by the WAEMU Council of Ministers. This law focuses on
ﬁnancial cooperatives, not only because of environmental
characteristics, such as the prominence of low-density rural
areas, but also because of the inﬂuence of DID. In July
1996, the WAEMU Council of Ministers went one step further
and adopted a regulatory framework for noncooperative
MFIs. Still, the legal framework was favoring ﬁnancial coop-
eratives, which beneﬁtted from permanent licenses, whereas
noncooperative MFIs needed to renew their license every
5 years.

The WAEMU microﬁnance legal framework was reformed
in April 2007. The revisions were threefold. First, in order to
level the playing ﬁeld, the new law covered all types of MFIs
equally and provided permanent licensing to NGOs and
shareholder-owned MFIs. Second,
it reinforced regulatory
supervision of large MFIs 10 by making BCEAO its direct
authority and putting national ministries in charge of monitor-

WOMEN LEADERS AND SOCIAL PERFORMANCE: EVIDENCE FROM FINANCIAL COOPERATIVES IN SENEGAL

439

ing. Third, new prudential norms were adopted to push MFIs
to professionalize and encourage the development of NGOs
and shareholder-owned MFIs (Pe´rilleux, 2013).

Nowadays, despite the regulatory changes, microﬁnance in
Senegal remains largely dominated by cooperatives. For Sene-
gal, BCEAO (2013) mentions a total of 238 MFIs serving 2.8
million clients through 958 service points. In 2013, these insti-
tutions collected EUR 315 million in savings and provided
EUR 363 million credit. The three largest institutions—Cre´dit
Mutuel du Se´ ne´gal (CMS), UM-PAMECAS, and Alliance de
Cre´dit et d’Epargne (ACEP)—are networks of ﬁnancial coop-
eratives, together representing around 77.7% of the members/-
clients of the microﬁnance sector in Senegal. 11 The fourth
largest MFI is MicroCred Se´ne´gal, a shareholder-owned insti-
tution formed in 2007. The remaining MFIs are small cooper-
ative networks, individual cooperatives, and NGOs. 12

In

vary:

some

networks,

The governance of WAEMU ﬁnancial cooperatives is ruled
by law. The structure includes the general assembly and three
governance bodies: the administration committee, the credit
committee, and the supervisory committee. While cooperatives
grow through networking, their levels of centralization and
integration
strategic
decision-making takes place at the local
level, whereas in
others, LCs delegate this task to the CU, and deliver harmo-
nized products. The Senegalese government promotes the cen-
tralized model and encourages stand-alone cooperatives to
join existing networks or create new ones (Pe´rilleux, 2013). 13
Measured by members, UM-PAMECAS is the second lar-
gest MFI in Senegal. Our choice to analyze this network was
guided by four factors. First, UM-PAMECAS was willing to
share its data with our research team. Second, among the
Big Three, UM-PAMECAS is the only one with a focus on
women. Third, its highly centralized structure is well-suited
to our research, based on the similarities between local gover-
nance bodies. Since human resources management is fully del-
egated to the CU, the top managers of all LCs have similar
contracts. The same argument applies to the functioning of
local boards. Assembling a sample of leaders active in identical
corporate structures and beneﬁtting from similar working con-
ditions reduces the occurrence of self-selection biases and pro-
tects our results against endogeneity issues. Last, the fact that
UM-PAMECAS ﬁts the cooperative model promoted by the
Senegalese government will probably add relevance to the con-
clusions of our study. One can indeed reasonably expect that
future ﬁnancial cooperatives in Senegal, and more broadly in
West Africa, will organize themselves into networks and adopt
a centralized and integrated structure.

The history of UM-PAMECAS helps in understanding its
current structure. In 1996, DID undertook a microﬁnance
project to supply ﬁnancial services to the poor in the suburbs
of the Senegalese capital Dakar. First, DID set up three LCs
and grouped them under a CU to make economies of scale
and enhance ﬁnancial sustainability. In 1998, after a 2-year
experimental phase, UM-PAMECAS became an oﬃcial insti-
tution. The network grew quickly and extended its activities
beyond Dakar, notably into rural areas. The current objective
of UM-PAMECAS is to cover the whole country, and it shows
strong concern for female participation (Tall Ba & Cisse´,
2009).

The governance structure of UM-PAMECAS is highly cen-
tralized, but both the CU and the LCs are legal entities with
ﬁnancial cooperative status. In principle, LCs are free to leave
the network; in practice, though, they have limited autonomy.
So far, no LC has ever asserted its right to stand alone. The
CU takes care of the ﬁnancial sustainability of the network.
Each LC has the four legal governance bodies. First, the LC

general meeting brings together all the members annually and
elects its representatives to the three other bodies. 14 Second,
the LC board has nine elected directors and establishes local
policies within the limits drafted by the CU. For instance, it is
entitled to set priorities regarding credit recovery, sensitization
to cooperative spirit, and gender empowerment. Third, the LC
credit committee is composed of ﬁve elected members and
makes loan-granting decisions on the basis of applications pre-
viously analyzed by credit oﬃcers and the priorities identiﬁed by
the board. Last, the LC supervisory committee, with ﬁve elected
members, controls operations and collects opinions and recom-
mendations from LC members.

Human resources are managed at CU level for the whole
network. In particular, the CU sends a top manager to each
LC. 15 The CU is supervised by two main bodies: the CU
board, composed of the local board chairpersons, and the
CU supervisory committee, made up of seven representatives
elected by the LCs. The CU board determines the strategic ori-
entations for the network. In particular, it decides upon pro-
duct design, expansion strategy, and network conﬁguration.
The CU board appoints an executive committee.

The

adopted

methodology

loan-granting

by
UM-PAMECAS is in line with that used by the bulk of the
microﬁnance industry, which typically supplies standardized
short-to-medium-term loans with ﬁxed interest rates and rigid
repayment schedules (Armenda´riz & Morduch, 2010). Since
the interest rate is ﬁxed, larger loans are more cost-eﬀective
for the lender, given ﬁxed transaction costs (Armenda´riz &
Szafarz, 2011). Hence, proﬁtability dictates the need to grant
larger loans, while social concern points in the opposite direc-
tion.

The decisions are made jointly by the LC board and the top
manager. The local board logically prioritizes the satisfaction
of its membership. According to the CU’s vice-president, “the
employees are more concerned with the proﬁtability of the net-
work, whereas elected members are more preoccupied by the
social performances of their local ﬁnancial cooperative”. 16
Since the staﬀ is managed by the CU executive team, any ten-
sions between ﬁnancial and social objectives translate into a
central-versus-local dynamic. 17 In this context, the next sec-
tions analyze the interplay of female/male-dominated boards
with female/male managers.

3. LITERATURE REVIEW

the papers

Gender diﬀerences in leadership are still controversial. While
most authors acknowledge the existence of a female leadership
style, ongoing controversies question the existence of gender
advantage in leadership, and the need for quotas to improve
gender diversity in organizations. Moreover, two separate
streams of literature deal with women in top-management posi-
tions and those holding elected mandates, respectively. Inter-
estingly,
some
conclusions, while focusing on speciﬁc issues. A signiﬁcant
number of papers in the political stream deal with developing
countries, making them especially relevant to our study. In
contrast, the bulk of the management stream disregards devel-
oping countries. In fact, gender concerns are relatively recent in
the corporate leadership literature (Fine, 2009). In this section,
we brieﬂy review the literature on female participation in
developing-country
in worldwide
top-management positions. We leave the discussion on quotas
for Section 5.4 where our results are summarized.

two streams

in the

elected

bodies

share

and

The contributions of female participation to democratic
governance in emerging economies are increasingly empha-

440

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

sized in the literature. The most relevant pieces of evidence on
this issue come from India, where the 1993 constitutional
amendment imposed that at least one-third of the seats in vil-
lage governments and in the presidential oﬃces should be
reserved for women. Chattopadhyay and Duﬂo (2004) show
that in villages reserved for women leaders, public goods are
more extensively developed, and bribery is less frequent. As
stated by Beaman et al. (2011, p. 163) “Women who are
elected leaders diﬀer from men in signiﬁcant ways and (. . .)
make diﬀerent policy decisions.” The papers suggest that
female leaders’ action is aligned with the preferences of women
and delivers pro-social outcomes. For instance, women leaders
are more likely to invest in drinking water facilities.

Strøm et al. (2014) investigate the impact of female board
members in MFIs by exploiting an original database with wide
geographic and time coverage (329 MFIs in 73 countries over
a 10-year period). The authors ﬁnd that the share of female
leaders in MFIs worldwide exhibits relatively low dispersion.
On average, the boards include 29% women members, 23%
of these boards have at least three women, and 27% of CEOs
are female. Interestingly, female leaders are more frequent in
MFIs with a gender bias toward female clients, and in NGOs
and cooperatives (compared with private ﬁrms). Strøm et al.
(2014) show that female managers and female board members
all have a positive
impact on ﬁnancial performance.
Hartarska, Mersland, and Nadolnyak (2014) complement
these results by showing that MFIs with female CEOs manage
to reach more clients than male-led MFIs. Our study will revi-
sit the issue of gender and social performance in MFIs, but
from a micro perspective.

that

Is there such a thing as female leadership style? Based on 17
studies, the pioneering meta-analysis by Dobbins and Platz
(1986) concludes that “male and female leaders exhibit equal
amounts of initiating structure and consideration and have
equally satisﬁed subordinates” (p. 118). Kolb (1999) notes,
however,
leadership stereotypes are predominantly
described in masculine terms. The argument is supported by
the observation that, all else equal, men tend to climb the cor-
porate ladder faster than women do, a phenomenon also
referred to as the “glass cliﬀ” (Ryan & Haslam, 2007). The
notion of role model (Eagly, 1987) helps rationalize the facts.
The role congruity theory developed by Eagly and Karau
(2002) asserts that women leaders are evaluated more harshly
than their male counterparts because leadership is associated
with stereotypically male characteristics, such as power and
authority. In addition, the intensity of the prejudice relates
to the perception of incongruity between the female gender
role and leadership roles.

From an extensive meta-analysis encompassing 162 studies,
Eagly and Johnson (1990) conclude that women leaders tend
to adopt a more democratic and collaborative style than
do men. 18 This distinctive style is people-oriented and “tran
sformational” rather than task-oriented and “transactional”.
concerns. According to
It also embeds higher
Waldman, Siegel, and Javidan (2006),
transformational
leadership implies intellectual stimulation that is signiﬁcantly
associated with the propensity of ﬁrms to engage in corporate
social responsibility activities.

social

Forsyth, Heiney, and Wright (1997) show that women opt-
ing for a task-oriented leadership style are rated negatively by
agents with conservative views. Likewise, women who opt for
a more confrontational
leadership style are judged more
harshly than their male colleagues (Eagly & Karau, 2002;
Korabik, Baril, & Watson, 1993). These facts are consistent
with role congruity theory. Nevertheless, articles in newspa-
pers often claim that being a woman is an advantage for hold-

ing leadership positions. With more nuances, Vecchio (2002)
advocates leadership conceptualization that subsumes the
dichotomy from role congruity theory, arguing that this
one-dimensional view of leadership has become “simplistic
and inappropriate” (p. 645). Recalling that Dobbins and
Platz (1986) fail to detect signiﬁcant sex diﬀerences in leader-
ship, the author dismisses the gender stereotypes used to claim
both male advantage (task focus, lower emotionality, and a
propensity to be directive) and female advantage (participa-
tion, power sharing, and inclusion).

The lively debate on the relevance of role congruity theory
for leadership (Eagly & Carli, 2003; Vecchio, 2003) testiﬁes
to the need for further assessments of leader role models in
various contexts. From that perspective, this paper explores
new avenues by scrutinizing the behavior of female leaders
in West African cooperatives. Theoretical considerations
aside, getting a better understanding of the actions and moti-
vations of women leaders in Africa is instrumental to develop-
ment goals. Barring skilled women from leadership positions
can indeed constitute a considerable waste of talent, especially
for countries with a shortage of well-trained managers. More-
over, female empowerment is typically associated with demo-
cratic development (Wyndow, Li, & Mattes, 2013). Assessing
the validity of gender-related leadership theories should help
address gender gaps and design meaningful policies for equity
and empowerment (Moser, 1989).

4. METHODOLOGY

We will run multivariate analyses to understand how gender
dominance in the board and the gender of the top manager
impact social performance. Following the tradition of the
microﬁnance literature, we use two typical indicators of social
performance (D’Espallier, Hudon, & Szafarz, 2013; Hermes
et al., 2011; Tchakoute-Tchuigoua, 2010). First, we consider
the share of loans allocated to women, which may capture
some kind of “gender aﬃnity” rather than pure social orienta-
tion. Second, we concentrate on average loan size, which is the
typical proxy for depth of outreach and is directly linked to
poverty alleviation. The two types of performance are inter-
twined since women are poorer than men on average. 19

Other indicators are used in the literature to evaluate MFIs’
social performance: the number of clients served is a proxy for
breadth of outreach, and the percentage of loans provided in
rural areas is used to measure the so-called “rurality bias”
(Strøm et al., 2014). In the case of UM-PAMECAS, however,
using these two indicators to assess LCs’ social performance
would make little sense since the network expansion strategy
is designed by the CU. The LC authorities have little say in
their location (rural versus urban), while the number of mem-
bers is mostly a question of population density in the targeted
area. Although we do not consider LC size as social perfor-
mance, we control for it in the econometric analysis. Less fre-
quently used social
indicators are discussed by Schreiner
(2002). They include cost to clients (cost supported by clients),
length of outreach (time frame of the supply), and scope of
outreach (number of ﬁnancial
supplied). As
acknowledged by the author, both the cost to clients and the
length of outreach are hard to measure. Scope of outreach is
irrelevant to our study since all LCs supply the same products.
The models estimated in the next section can be summarized

contracts

as:
Y it ¼ a1FBit þ a2FM it þ a3FB  FM it þ a4X it þ a5Yeart þ li þ eit
ð1Þ

WOMEN LEADERS AND SOCIAL PERFORMANCE: EVIDENCE FROM FINANCIAL COOPERATIVES IN SENEGAL

441

where Y it is the social performance—i.e., the share of loans
allocated to women or the average loan size—for LC i in
month t, FBit
is the Female-dominated Board dummy that
equals 1 if the board has at least 50% of female members
and 0 otherwise, FM it
is the Female Manager dummy that
the manager is a woman and 0 otherwise,
equals 1 if
FB  FM it is an interaction term capturing the joint eﬀect of
female-dominated board and female manager. Vector X it rep-
resents a set of control variables comprising LCs’ share of
female members and LCs’ total asset that proxies LC size.
The speciﬁcation also includes year dummies and LC-speciﬁc
eﬀects acknowledging for LC’s
invariant characteristics.
Finally, eit is the idiosyncratic error term.

To estimate Eqn. (1), we will run robust ﬁxed-eﬀect (FE)
panel estimation. Controlling for stable LC characteristics,
whether observable or not, reduces the risk of biases due to
omitted variables. We will perform FE estimation based on
mean-diﬀerenced data—also referred to as within-estimation
(Hausman & Taylor, 1981)—to avoid losing 1 month of obser-
vations, as would be the case had we chosen an FE model in
diﬀerences.
removes
panel-level averages from each side of the model, thus elimi-
nating the LC-speciﬁc eﬀect. We will use the robust option
to correct for potential cross-sectional heteroskedasticity and
serial correlation.

within-estimation

addition,

In

We will subsequently check the robustness of our results
along three dimensions. First, we will question the estimation
method and run random-eﬀect (RE) estimation instead of FE
panel regressions. Our baseline regressions will use FE panel
estimation. This choice is guided by prudence. Unlike RE esti-
mation, FE estimation does not require the assumption that
individual eﬀects are orthogonal to regressors. In any case,
FE estimates are unbiased and consistent. Still, under the
orthogonality assumption, the RE speciﬁcation is preferable
because it provides estimators that are unbiased, consistent,
and eﬃcient, whereas the FE estimators are not eﬃcient
(Hausman, 1978). Second, we will check whether gender dom-
inance is really necessary for female board members to bring
their social agenda to the fore. To do so, we will replace the
majority threshold (50%) by 33%.

Third, endogeneity is a standard concern in the microﬁnance
literature, at least in nonrandomized studies. 20 Endogeneity
has two major sources: omitted-variable biases and reverse
causality. To address those concerns, we refer to Adams and
Ferreira (2009), who estimate the impact of female board
members on ﬁnancial performance in for-proﬁt companies.
The authors recognize that ﬁrm culture can drive signiﬁcant
omitted-variable biases for example, because more progressive
ﬁrms can have a larger number of female directors. To over-
come this issue and control for time-invariant ﬁrms’ character-
istics such as culture, the authors use ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects. In our
case, the omission of meaningful variables is unlikely because
all the LCs of UM-PAMECAS belong to the same network
and share cultural and social norms. However, for the sake
of caution, we follow Adams and Ferreira (2009)’s recommen-
dation and insert LC ﬁxed eﬀects in all our regressions. On
reverse causality, Adams and Ferreira (2009) stress that
“(. . .) both director compensation structure and ﬁrm perfor-
mance are likely to aﬀect both the incentives of women to join
ﬁrms and the incentives of ﬁrms to hire female directors”
(p. 295). To some extent, the design of our study supported
by the speciﬁc governance features of UM-PAMECAS makes
this scenario rather implausible. Board members are elected at
the general meeting by all the LC’s members from among
themselves. The interests of the voting members diﬀer accord-
ing to whether they are men or women, and whether they need

small or large loans. Making the case for endogeneity is diﬃ-
cult since coordination issues are combined with multiple
objectives. Furthermore, we control for the proportion of
female members, who constitute the group more likely to
share common interests.

In principle, in model (1) reverse causality could also stem
the
from social performance aﬀecting the gender of
manager. However,
this scenario is implausible because
UM-PAMECAS human resource management is centralized.
The CU assigns all the employees to the LCs, and rotates them
every 5 years or so. UM-PAMECAS female managers willing
to join more socially oriented LCs are unable to do so. From
the econometric standpoint, centralization protects our results
again reverse causality. In this regard, our context is more favor-
able than that of Adams and Ferreira (2009). Regardless of this
argument, we will address the concern of reverse causality by
means of a robustness check exploiting the time dimension. Pre-
cisely, we will investigate further if the expected changes in
social performance actually occur within 6 months of a switch
in manager’s gender. We will thus address the concern of endo-
geneity by scrutinizing social performance around the transi-
tions from male/female managers to female/male managers.

Finally, we have no other information on the managers
besides their gender. One could thus object to our results on
the grounds that the diﬀerences we capture might be due to
other characteristics such as age, education, and place of ori-
gin. While our data exclude these characteristics, the concern
is again mitigated by the fact that all the managers are hired,
supervised, and promoted by the same body, the CU executive
committee. The managers themselves have little to say in their
workplace. In this way, we can at least exclude the presence of
a self-selection bias.

Overall, we are dealing with an original hand-collected data-
base including the characteristics of over 200,000 microloans.
In addition, to gain conﬁdence in the results, we will submit
our multivariate panel-based analysis to robustness checks,
which will question the estimation methodology and address
the endogeneity concern.

5. DATA, RESULTS, AND DISCUSSION

(a) Data and descriptive statistics

We use monthly data on all the loans granted by the LCs in
the UM-PAMECAS network over the period stretching from
January 2007 to May 2010. Altogether, these 36 LCs granted
204,609 loans over the period under study. For each loan we
observe the gender of the borrower and the loan size. 21 Our
dataset is thus made up of an unbalanced panel of 1,158
monthly observations (36 LCs over 41 months). Appendix A
features detailed information on the LCs, collected in May
2010. Table 8 reveals that 61% of the LCs operate in urban
areas whereas the remaining 39% are located in peri-urban
and rural areas. The average LC is 10 years old and holds total
assets of EUR 1.6M. Table 9 provides social characteristics.
On average, by May 2010, the LCs were serving 11,200 mem-
bers, of whom 52% were female. The mean percentage of
women in the LC board 22 reaches 32%, whereas 31% of top
managers are female. 23

is no exception. To address

Around the world, women are poorer than men on average.
And Senegal
reality,
UM-PAMECAS has designed a special credit product target-
ing poor women. So-called AFSSEF 24 loans are oﬀered to
women who ﬁnd it diﬃcult to provide collateral. In addition,
UM-PAMECAS proposes
arrangements

various

credit

this

442

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

grouped into four categories: small-business loans, personal
loans, medium-business loans, 25 and so-called “in ﬁne loans”
subject to bullet repayment. 26 The credit oﬃcers are in charge
of directing applicants toward the loan type that ﬁts their
needs. Table 10 in Appendix B provides the characteristics
and market shares of each type of loan. Once the category is
determined, loan size is the sole credit condition tailored to
the applicant’s proﬁle.

Since it was formed, UM-PAMECAS has shown strong
concern for female participation. On average over the study
period, women account for 53% of total membership and
65% of borrowers. However, they receive signiﬁcantly smaller
loans. 27 On average, loans to female borrowers are nearly half
the size of those granted to their male counterparts. The
gender-blind average loan size is EUR 692, 28 while the
gender-sensitive averages are EUR 515 for women and EUR
1,025 for men.

Loan allocation depends on the composition of the board.
Panel A in Table 1 shows that LCs with female-dominated
boards, i.e., with at least 50% female members, serve more
women. The average loan size is also aﬀected by the board
make-up, but only slightly. These ﬁgures are in line with the
literature showing that ﬁrms with a higher share of women
on the board exhibit greater social and ethical orientations
(Bernardi, Bosco, & Columb, 2009; Smith, Wokutch,
Harrington, & Dennis, 2001). Logically, female-dominated
boards are more likely to be found in LCs with a greater num-
ber of female members. The likelihood of having a female
manager is much higher in male-dominated boards than in
female-dominated ones (39% versus 20%). This striking fact
is further investigated in Table 2.

The descriptive statistics disaggregated by manager gender
(Table 1, Panel B) contrast with the literature consensus that
female managers are more socially oriented than their male
counterparts. Compared with males, female managers are
associated with fewer loans to women and higher loan sizes.
Unexpectedly, female top managers are more frequent in
LCs with a higher share of male members. Importantly,
Table 1 reveals that the relationship between managers’ gender
and the gendered composition of LCs and their boards is not
random.

In Table 2, a Pearson independence test conﬁrms that
female managers are signiﬁcantly more frequently associated
with male-dominated boards, and vice versa (p < 0.01). This
result suggests that the CU makes strategic staﬀ allocations
and preferably
to LCs with
female-dominated boards. While the CU hardly inﬂuences
the board composition, it fully controls the allocation of top
managers. Hence, we interpret the outcome of the indepen-

sends male managers

Table 2. Manager’s gender and board composition: contingency table

Male-dominated

Female-dominated

Total

Male Manager

Female Manager

Total

board

559

(595.5)

358

(321.5)

917

board

193

(156.5)

48

(84.5)

241

752

406

1,158

Note: Expected frequencies in parentheses. Pearson independence test:
v2(1) = 30.65 (p < 0.01).

dence test as evidence that the CU management aims to curb
social biases that might hinder the consolidated ﬁnancial situ-
ation of the network. Further econometric analysis is needed
to disentangle the actions of the manager and the LC board.

(b) Regression analysis

For each explained social performance, we estimate two
speciﬁcations. In the ﬁrst, the explanatory variables include
two gender dummies: one for the manager, the other for board
dominance. In the second speciﬁcation, we add the interaction
between the two dummies to account for the dependence iden-
tiﬁed from Table 2. In all equations, the control variables
include the percentage of female members and the LC size
proxied by total assets. 29

The baseline results are reported in Table 3. In speciﬁcations
(1) and (2), the interaction term is absent. Using the share of
female borrowers as an indicator of social performance, regres-
sion (1) conﬁrms that female-dominated boards exhibit higher
social orientation in loan-granting than male-dominated ones.
Regression (1) also shows that the share of loans granted to
women is not signiﬁcantly aﬀected by the manager’s gender.
In line with Agier and Szafarz (2013a), we rule out the “gender
aﬃnity” hypothesis for the manager. The attitude of female
managers contrasts with the behavior of same-gender elected
board members, who have a signiﬁcantly positive inﬂuence on
the share of loans granted to women. Regression (2) shows that
the average loan size is hardly aﬀected by gender-speciﬁc vari-
ables. The results from regression (2) suggest that the diﬀerences
found in Table 1 are mainly attributable to external shocks cap-
tured through year dummies.

Speciﬁcations (3) and (4) in Table 3 include an interaction
term to account for the dependency between the manager’s gen-
der and gender dominance in the board. The results resolve the
apparent puzzle detected from the descriptive statistics. In both

Table 1. Descriptive statistics

Panel A: Gender dominance on the

Panel B: Manager’s gender

board

Female

(N = 241)

68.3
671
19.9
56.4
1,898

Male

(N = 917)

64.1***
697*
39.0***
51.5***
1,462***

Female

(N = 406)

64.5
765

49.5
1,513

Male

(N = 752)

65.2
653***

54.2***
1,574

Share of female borrowers (%)
Average loan size
Share of female managers (%)
Share of female members (%)
Total assets (in EUR ‘000)

Note: The stars indicate the results of t-tests for equal means between female- and male-dominated boards (Panel A) and between female and male
managers (Panel B).
*** Signiﬁcant at the 1% level.
* Signiﬁcant at the 10% level.

WOMEN LEADERS AND SOCIAL PERFORMANCE: EVIDENCE FROM FINANCIAL COOPERATIVES IN SENEGAL

443

Table 3. Impact of women leaders on social performance: ﬁxed-eﬀect panel estimation

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Share of female borrowers Average loan size

Share of female borrowers Average loan size

Female-dominated board

Female manager

Female manager * female-dominated board

Share of female members

Total assets

Year
Constant

Statistics
N
F-Stat
R2-Within
R2-Between

Note: Robust standard errors reported in parentheses.
*** Signiﬁcant at the 1% level.
** Signiﬁcant at the 5% level.

0.0196***
(0.00718)
 0.00837
(0.0158)

 0.00613
(0.0847)
3.02e 06
(1.39e 05)

Yes

0.678***
(0.0511)

1,158
19.26***
0.107
0.126

 22.32
(25.48)
 17.16
(26.37)

53.78
(180.7)
0.0568
(0.0528)

Yes

569.3***
(134.4)

1,158
3.98***
0.0181
0.0281

0.0168**
(0.00661)
 0.0384***
(0.00880)
0.0628***
(0.0133)
 0.0336
(0.0794)
 1.54e 06
(1.52e 05)

Yes

0.709***
(0.0488)

1,158
20.57***
0.115
0.0363

 16.84
(23.30)
42.29**
(17.43)
 124.5***
(18.62)

108.2
(177.7)
0.0658
(0.0513)

Yes

506.5***
(133.9)

1,158
21.68***
0.0220
0.0872

equations, the loading of the interaction term is highly signiﬁ-
cant and far surpasses that of the female-manager dummy. As
a consequence, the empirical results should be interpreted by
examining
than
gender-domination in the board and manager’s gender sepa-
rately.

combinations

gendered

rather

The results suggest that female top managers associated
with female-dominated boards favor social performance. In
contrast, when the board is male-dominated board female
managers serve fewer women, and grant signiﬁcantly larger
loans than do their male colleagues. Before discussing those
results in Subsection 5(d), we will test their robustness.

Next, we re-estimate model (1) with random eﬀects. The
results in Table 4 align perfectly with those obtained previ-
ously (Table 3). As testiﬁed by p-values, Hausman tests fail
to reject the RE speciﬁcations for regressions (1) and (3),
which explain the share of female borrowers. In contrast, the
test rejects the RE speciﬁcation at the 10% level for regressions
(2) and (4), which concern average loan size. The exercise sug-
gests that our ﬁndings are robust to the estimation method.

To check whether the majority threshold of 50% is necessary
for female board-members to bring their social agenda to the
fore, we use the threshold of 33% instead of the 50% used in
Tables 3 and 4. Table 5 shows that 33% of female board mem-
bers is an insuﬃcient proportion to produce any signiﬁcant
impact. This conﬁrms that majorities matter for corporate
control (Chapelle & Szafarz, 2005).

(c) Addressing endogeneity

As explained in the methodological section, the governance
structure of UM-PAMECAS protects our results against the
reverse causality that would go from social performance to
board gendered composition. To address the concern of
reverse causality from social performance to the manager’s
gender, we examine transitions, i.e., the points in time when
a manager is replaced by a colleague of the opposite sex, as
an additional check to reject the possibility of reverse causal-
ity. We have few time variations because boards are elected
yearly, managers are reshuﬄed every 5 years or so, and our

observation period is limited to 4 years. In total, our data
include only seven transitions
in
manager’s gender. Hence, the check is conﬁned to stylized
facts.

involving a change

First and most importantly, we observe that in all board
elections taking place in the year following a transition, the
board’s gender dominance remained unchanged. Hence, the
manager’s gender does not seem to have any inﬂuence on
votes. Second, we scrutinize the two types of social perfor-
mance (average loan size and share of female borrowers)
6 months before and after the transitions.

Table 6 summarizes the results in the four possible situa-
tions. For each transition we compare the average loan sizes
and the shares of females in the 6-month periods before and
after the change in manager’s gender. When there is more than
one case, we report mean values. The transitions from a male
to a female manager are associated with higher social perfor-
mance. Speciﬁcally, the average loan size decreases ( EUR
39), and the share of female borrowers increases slightly
(+1.3%). However, LCs exhibit contrasted impacts depending
on whether their board is male- or female-dominated. As pre-
dicted by our baseline model, in the case where the board is
male-dominated, replacing a male manager by a female one
was detrimental to social performance (higher loan size, smal-
ler share of female borrowers).

The transitions from female to male manager deliver mixed
social performance. We observe an increase in average loan
size (+EUR 46) and a positive—but below-1%—variation in
the share of female borrowers (+0.27%). The increase in aver-
age loan size is spectacular in the LC with a female-dominated
board (+EUR 120), where the growth rate surpasses 15%. The
cases of male-dominated boards are less clear-cut. Although
the change observed in the share of female borrowers is in line
with the prediction of our baseline model, the small increase in
average loan size (+EUR 22) goes in the opposite direction.
Overall, most ﬁgures are in line with the baseline results pre-
sented in Subsection 5(b) (precisely, seven out of eight transi-
tion eﬀects). This is a reasonably good performance given that
we are dealing with very small numbers.

444

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

Table 4. Impact of gender on social performance: random-eﬀect panel estimation

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Share of female borrowers Average loan size

Share of female borrowers Average loan size

Female-dominated board

Female manager

Female manager * female-dominated board

Share of female members

Total assets

Year
Constant

Statistics
N
Wald v2
R2-Within
R2-Between

Hausman test
v2
p-Value

Note: Robust standard errors reported in parentheses.
*** Signiﬁcant at the 1% level.
** Signiﬁcant at the 5% level.
* Signiﬁcant at the 10% level.

0.0214***
(0.00602)
 0.00630
(0.0135)

0.0636
(0.0969)
4.92e 06
(1.03e 05)

Yes

0.633***
(0.0543)

1,158

162.18***

0.106
0.202

4.02
0.674

 23.88
(25.10)
2.240
(23.27)

 285.9*
(162.2)
0.0590
(0.0408)

Yes

736.9***
(109.7)

1,158
34.32***
0.0154
0.274

11.39
0.077

0.0181***
(0.00589)
 0.0270**
(0.0109)
0.0492***
(0.0129)

0.0418
(0.0917)
2.14e 06
(1.11e 05)

Yes

0.656***
(0.0520)

1,158

197.42***

0.114
0.105

7.19
0.409

 13.37
(22.39)
58.71**
(23.98)
 140.4***
(27.11)
 214.6
(167.8)
0.0664*
(0.0371)

Yes

669.3***
(112.9)

1,158

134.37***
0.0198
0.277

13.78
0.055

Table 5. Impact of gender on social performance: using the 33% threshold

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Share of female borrowers

Average loan size

Share of female borrowers

Average loan size

Female-33% board

Female manager

Female manager * female-33% board

Share of female members

Total assets

Year
Constant

Statistics
N
F-Stat
R2-Within
R2-Between

0.00195
(0.0128)
 0.00636
(0.0163)

 0.00354
(0.0880)
 2.49e 06
(1.32e 05)

Yes

0.686***
(0.0522)

1,158
16.62***
0.104
0.0958

Note: Robust standard errors reported in parentheses.
*** Signiﬁcant at the 1% level.

 6.570
(24.14)
 20.19
(27.97)

51.30
(182.5)
0.0629
(0.0512)

Yes

561.7***
(132.3)

1,158
3.350***
0.0177
0.0289

0.00237
(0.0137)
 0.00593
(0.0183)
 0.000775
(0.0208)
 0.00328
(0.0893)
 2.41e 06
(1.34e 05)

Yes

0.686***
(0.0549)

1,158
14.86***
0.104
0.0996

7.885
(37.96)
 5.290
(34.17)
 26.75
(40.94)

60.28
(182.1)
0.0658
(0.0513)

Yes

542.4***
(139.3)

1,158
3.830***
0.0180
0.0284

(d) Discussion and policy implications

To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study involving interac-
tions of female board members and women top managers in
developing countries. In the microﬁnance literature, gendered
attitudes are documented for loan oﬃcers (Agier & Szafarz,
2013a) and leaders (Mersland & Strøm, 2009), but gender
interactions remain unaddressed, probably because of the

scarcity of women leaders. We circumvent this problem by
exploiting a unique database released by a Senegalese network
of 36 ﬁnancial cooperatives sharing identical operating system
and governance characteristics. In addition, a number of
checks attest to the robustness of our panel estimation results,
including against the thorny issue of endogeneity. The remain-
der of this section summarizes and discusses our main results
and suggests policy implications.

WOMEN LEADERS AND SOCIAL PERFORMANCE: EVIDENCE FROM FINANCIAL COOPERATIVES IN SENEGAL

445

Transitions
M ! F
Manager

F ! M
Manager

Table 6. Transitions from male/female manager to female/male manager

Male-dominated board

Female-dominated board

1 case

D ALS = +32
D SFB =  3%

3 cases

D ALS = +22
D SFB = +0.5%

2 cases*

D ALS =   77
D SFB = +3.5%

1 case

D ALS = +120
D SFB =  0.5%

Global mean

3 cases

D ALS =  39
D SFB = +1.3%

4 cases

D ALS = +46

D SFB = +0.27%

Note: D ALS (in EUR) is the diﬀerence between the average loan size computed over the 6-month period following the transition and that computed over
the previous 6-month period. D SFB is the diﬀerence between the share of female borrowers computed over the 6-month period following the transition
and that computed over the previous 6-month period.
* In one of the two cases, we use 3-month averages because the transition happened at the very end of the sample period.

To ease comparisons, Table 7 presents the regression results
with an emphasis on leaders’ gender combinations. 30 The
benchmark is the situation of male managers associated with
male-dominated boards. In this conﬁguration, changing the
manager’s gender has a large and negative impact on the share
of female borrowers, and a small and positive impact on the
average loan size. Apparently, female managers favor loans
to men as well as larger loans, but only when these managers
are associated with male-dominated boards. In contrast, when
the board is female-dominated, the eﬀects are reversed: female
managers associated with female-dominated boards serve
women preferably, and grant signiﬁcantly smaller loans than
do their male colleagues under the same circumstances. Table 7
also shows that male managers mitigate the social orientation
of female-dominated boards. The average loan size granted by
male managers is insensitive to gender dominance in the
board. Still, the impact of female-dominated boards is visible
through the moderately positive impact on the share of female
borrowers.

We

boards

show that

female-dominated

adopt
loan-granting policies that are socially oriented and favorable
to female borrowers. These results are in line with the ﬁndings
of Chattopadhyay and Duﬂo (2004) and Beaman et al. (2011)
on the action of female elected leaders in Indian villages. Less
expectedly, they also conﬁrm evidence by Matsa and Miller
(2011) on publicly traded US companies showing that female
board members support the presence of women in the top
management. 31 From this perspective, our ﬁndings fuel the
debate that surrounds the notion of gender aﬃnity (“women
for women”), sometimes opposed to women’s same-sex con-
ﬂict, which according to Sheppard and Aquino (2014) is overly
problematized.

At the same time, our results show that the social perfor-
mance of women leaders is closely linked to their role in the
organization they serve. In ﬁnancial cooperatives, the behav-
ior of female top managers contrasts with the attitude of
women on the board. Our results suggest that female man-
agers align their preferences on those of the majority of board
members they work with. They neither prioritize social out-
comes nor systematically pursue the ﬁnancial objective of

the CU that appoints them. Rather, they tend to follow the
policy rules set by their democratically elected local boards.
In contrast, the average loan size corresponding to male man-
agers is insensitive to LC board composition.

An alternative explanation could be that female managers
are powerless when associated with a male-dominated board.
But this scenario is inconsistent with the facts. Indeed, female
managers associated with male-dominated boards grant signif-
icantly larger loans than do male managers associated with
male-dominated boards. Female managers are thus eﬃcient
in their work. Aligning their objectives on those of their local
boards is not necessarily a sign of weakness.

in the microﬁnance

Our study might have policy implications. Prudently, we
stick to tentative recommendations for ﬁnancial cooperatives
in West Africa, keeping in mind that this speciﬁc form of gov-
ernance is sponsored by local regulatory authorities. While the
cooperative status has proven to deliver eﬀective social perfor-
mance, it is still exposed to the new commercialization trend
taking place
industry (Hudon &
Sandberg, 2013). 32 Our ﬁndings are in line with the bulk of
the literature on gender and leadership, which associates
female elected leaders with prevalence of social outcomes.
Therefore, we speculate that female presence on the boards
of ﬁnancial cooperatives act as a natural hedge against mission
drift since female board members tend to devote more atten-
tion than men to social performance. However, in this respect
the evidence reveals that a small female presence is insuﬃcient.
If socially minded gender quotas are to be imposed on boards,
they should be close to 50%.

seem to

cooperatives

But do ﬁnancial cooperatives in West Africa need gender
quotas? Despite a women-friendly orientation associated with
democratic principles, the governing and executive bodies of
ﬁnancial
predominantly
male-dominated, albeit with a signiﬁcant minority of women
involved. Overall, the ﬁnancial cooperatives under study have
52% of female members, but only 32% of female board mem-
bers and 31% of female top managers (ﬁgures from May
2010). The shares of female board members and top managers
are comparable to those provided by Strøm et al. (2014) for
the microﬁnance
(29% and 27%,

industry worldwide

be

Table 7. Summary of results

Board dominance

Manager’s gender

Share of female borrowers (SFB)

Average loan size (ALS)

Female
Female
Male
Male

Female
Male
Female
Male

++
+
- -

Benchmark

- -
=
+

Note: + Signiﬁcantly positive estimate (at the 5% level) with moderate size (SFB below 3%, ALS below EUR 50), ++ signiﬁcantly positive estimate (at the
5% level) with high size (SFB above 3%, ALS above EUR 50), - - signiﬁcantly negative estimate (at the 5% level) with high size, = insigniﬁcant estimate.

446

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

respectively). In this respect, the ﬁgures in our study can be
seen as an encouragement to impose quotas, like in Norway
(Pande & Ford, 2011), in order to raise the shares of women
in leadership positions.

capacities

about women’s

However, gender quotas and reservations for women have
well-known drawbacks, including reinforcement of negative
stereotypes
(Franceschet &
Piscopo, 2008). Klettner, Clarke, and Boersma (2014) advo-
cate the alternative strategy of soft regulation, such as corpo-
rate governance codes with voluntary targets. In microﬁnance,
issuing codes of ethics is common practice (Kleynjans &
Hudon, 2014). Another concern relates to the availability of
female leaders, at least in the short run (Adams & Ferreira,
2009). Arguably, this concern is even more acute in developing
economies, notably in Africa, than in developed ones. In sum,
low quotas (around 30%) would be ineﬀective and high quotas
(around 50%) would be hard to enforce. While gender quotas
have proved successful in many cases, their application to
ﬁnancial cooperatives in West Africa is probably premature.

6. CONCLUSION

Taking advantage of the double bottom line and the speciﬁc
democratic networking structure of ﬁnancial cooperatives
makes it possible to identify separately the policies followed
by female-dominated boards and female top managers. First,
our results suggest that female-dominated boards favor social
orientation in loan-granting. Second, although careers are
supervised by the CU, we ﬁnd that female managers behave
in accordance with local authorities’ policies. This, in turn,
could explain why the central authority is tempted to assign
female managers to LCs with male-dominated boards, which
are more rigid on ﬁnancial discipline. Hence, sending female
managers to places where men are in the majority on the board
is a way of pushing these women to serve the CU’s best inter-
ests. As a result, our ﬁndings partly contradict the common
wisdom according to which women are systematically more
socially oriented than men under similar circumstances. While
female-dominated boards enhance social loan allocation poli-
cies, female managers associated with male-dominated boards
do not mitigate the ﬁnancial discipline imposed by the board.
In fact, they reinforce it.

Admittedly, our database is limited to a single network of
ﬁnancial cooperatives operating in Senegal. This restricts the
external validity of our conclusions. Moreover, concerns
about business conforming to social and ethical norms vary
across countries (van den Heuvel, Soeters, & Go¨ ssling,
2014). Further research could investigate how female top man-
agers inﬂuence the social performance of hybrid institutions in
both developed and developing countries. 33 In addition, the
governance of cooperatives is more complex than that of
for-proﬁt ﬁrms (Cornforth, 2004; Hudon & Pe´rilleux, 2014).
In particular, aside from securing the ﬁnancial sustainability

of the whole network, the objectives of the CU are not
clear-cut. Therefore it is diﬃcult, if not impossible, to assess
whether top managers’ behavior is aligned with their employ-
er’s objectives. The best we could do is compare the on-ﬁeld
interactions of male and female managers with their local
board members. Admittedly, this leaves room for further
investigation into tensions between social and ﬁnancial perfor-
mance from a gender perspective.

Worldwide, not-for-proﬁt and hybrid organizations are typ-
ically less reluctant than for-proﬁts to hire female top man-
agers. The sector is also known for producing higher job
satisfaction than for-proﬁt ﬁrms do (Benz, 2005). So far, these
two features have been observed independently. They may
possibly be linked. Female managers’ tendency to behave
consensually can indeed contribute to enhancing overall satis-
faction, not only among co-workers but also among members
of governing bodies. 34

Importantly, our dataset comes from Africa whereas exist-
ing evidence on managerial leadership concentrates on indus-
trialized countries. While leaders’ attitudes are known to be
sensitive to corporate context, the way they correlate with
country-level development is still terra incognita. It is often
advocated that empowering the female workforce is an eﬃ-
cient means to reach development goals. Still, empowering
women within the corporate world is hard without deeper cul-
tural and legal changes within societies (Duﬂo, 2012; Ganle,
Afriyie, & Segbeﬁa, 2015; Garikipati, 2008). On the other
hand, Mersland and Strøm (2009) and D’Espallier, Gue´rin,
and Mersland (2013) use global data to show that female
CEOs can make a diﬀerence in the management of MFIs.
Our results conﬁrm their ﬁndings and detail the mechanisms
that take place at the micro level. They also enrich the analysis
by looking at the interaction between managers’ and elected
members’ leadership.

The leadership literature theory provides rationales for the
behavioral evidence detected in our analysis. First, female
managers are less inclined than men to deﬁne career success
in terms of promotion (Sturges, 1999), and legitimacy is
known to be a major driver of female managerial action
(Silverman, Slemrod, & Uler, 2014). 35 Second, female man-
agers typically adopt a participative style and use their rela-
tional skills (Buttner, 2001; Eagly, 1987). When they depart
from this gender role, they are judged more harshly than their
male colleagues, and they may suﬀer social reprisals. All these
arguments could explain why female managers tend to adopt
people-oriented leadership styles and refrain from hurting
the feelings of local board members even though the latter
have almost no impact on their careers. From a theoretical
perspective, our results extend the validity of the gender con-
gruity theory in leadership beyond industrialized countries.
Further work is still needed to explore how far women leaders
in developing countries can bring the social agenda of ﬁnancial
inclusion to the forefront.

NOTES

1. See Jones and Kalmi (2009) for a worldwide survey of the cooperative
sector.

2. Nevertheless, Strøm, D’Espallier, and Mersland (2014) show that
female leadership has a positive impact on the performance of
microﬁnance institutions.

3. Although ﬁnancial cooperatives serve a fairly high share of women,
they are surpassed by other types of microcredit providers. In a sweeping
analysis of the microﬁnance sector, Mersland (2009) shows that ﬁnancial
cooperative membership is gender-balanced, with an average of 51.9%
women. Nevertheless, microﬁnance institutions with a for-proﬁt and an
NGO status manage to obtain higher rates by serving 55% and 82.1% of

WOMEN LEADERS AND SOCIAL PERFORMANCE: EVIDENCE FROM FINANCIAL COOPERATIVES IN SENEGAL

447

female clients, respectively. D’Espallier, Gue´rin, and Mersland (2011) also
stress that NGOs are more likely than ﬁnancial cooperatives and for-proﬁt
microﬁnance institutions to adopt women-friendly policies.

4. The situation varies across ethnic groups. Women from originally
nomadic groups, such as Peulh and Hall Peular, tend to have fewer
responsibilities than those from Wolof and Serere groups (Creevey, 1991).

5. The ROSCA members meet on a regular basis. In each meeting, the
members contribute a ﬁxed amount to a common pot. This pot goes to a
member designated in a strict alternation pattern. As a result, the member
who gets the pot is a borrower, and the others are savers.

16.

Interview conducted on January 21, 2010.

17. Desrochers and Fischer (2005) conﬁrm that ﬁnancial cooperatives
that are more closely integrated are more ﬁnancially sustainable.

18. T his analysis was
su pplem ented by Eagly and
Johannesen-Schmidt (2001). Druskat (1994) and Meinhard and Foster
(2003) observe similar characteristics in not-for-proﬁt institutions.

later

19. Women are not only poorer than men on average; they are also better
credit risks than men (D’Espallier et al., 2011). See Servet (2011) on
corporate responsibility and social performance.

6. To avoid confusing them with traditional cooperatives, the ﬁnancial
cooperatives have a speciﬁc name (in French: “Mutuelles d’e´pargne et de
cre´dit”).

20. See Hermes and Lensink (2007). For a macro perspective, see also
Imai, Gaiha, Thapa, and Annim (2012).

7. WAEMU is composed of Benin, Burkina Faso, Ivory Coast,
Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Niger, Senegal, and Togo. It was created in 1994
to replace the West African Economic and Monetary Union, intensify the
intra-zone trade, and reinforce the supervision of public deﬁcits (Seck,
2013). WAEMU has a single currency, the CFA franc (CFAF), which has
a ﬁxed parity with the euro (EUR 1 = CFAF 655.957). CFAF is regulated
by BCEAO, the WAEMU Central Bank. The laws enacted by the
WAEMU Council of Ministers are later enforced in each member state by
means of national decrees. Regarding microﬁnance, WAEMU countries
share a common microﬁnance regulatory framework, and BCEAO is in
charge of supervising large microﬁnance institutions.

8. Created in 1970, DID is the NGO arm of the Desjardins Group, which
is the largest cooperative ﬁnancial group in Canada (Desrochers &
Fischer, 2005). Desjardins Group is a network of 376 ﬁnancial
cooperatives and 864 service points. In 2013, its consolidated total asset
reached USD 179 billion. DID’s objective is to help disadvantaged
communities in developing countries to access ﬁnancial services. DID
develops and supports microﬁnance institutions worldwide, and shares
Desjardins’ expertise and experience with its sponsored institutions.

9. PARMEC is the acronym (in French) for “Programme d’Appui a` la
Re´forme des Mutuelles d’Epargne et de Cre´dit.”

10. Large MFIs are those with total savings and/or total credit over
EUR 3 million.

11. More precisely, 39% for CMS, 30.3% for UM-PAMECAS, and 8.4%
for ACEP (Direction de la Microﬁnance, June 2013).

12. Over the 50 Senegalese MFIs recorded by the Microﬁnance Infor-
mation Exchange (MIX) for year 2013, one is shareholder-owned, four are
NGOs, 15 are networks of ﬁnancial cooperatives, and 30 are small isolated
ﬁnancial cooperatives, some of which serving around 500 members only
(http://www.mixmarket.org/).

In developed countries, decentralization is a key feature of social

13.
banks (Corne´e & Szafarz, 2014).

21. We have omitted the few group loans and those for which the sex of
the borrower is unclear, leaving us with a total of 193,050 loans.

22.
In our database, a board member is any elected member of a
governing body (board, credit committee, or LC supervisory committee).

23. The typical staﬀ of an LC includes one manager, one chief cashier,
four cashiers and three credit oﬃcers. The top manager supervises
operations, the chief cashier is in charge of accounting, the cashiers take
care of ﬁnancial transactions with members, and the credit oﬃcers analyze
credit applications and subsequently enforce repayment. Overall, LC staﬀs
are gender balanced. In May 2010, 50% of the LC employees were female.
However, women are under-represented in top managerial position.

24. AFSSEF means “Access to ﬁnancial services for Senegalese women”
(in French: Acce`s des Femmes Se´ne´galaises aux Services Financiers).

25. These typically larger loans require an additional approval by the CU
(1.1% of the sample).

In ﬁne loans are meant to ﬁnance agriculture, stockbreeding, and

26.
other activities that generate irregular cash ﬂows.

27. Agier and Szafarz (2013b) analyze the multiple causes of gendered
diﬀerences in loan size.

28. The average loan size represents 50% of the PPP Senegalese GNI per
capita in 2010 (WBI, 2011). This is in line with the general average size of
ﬁnancial cooperatives’ loans in microﬁnance, which reaches 51% of the
GNI per capita (Pe´rilleux, Hudon, & Bloy, 2012).

29.
In the literature, two variables are typically used to proxy ﬁnancial
cooperative size:
total assets and number of members. To avoid
multicollinearity, only one of
these variables may be included in
regressions. Here, we have favored total assets, for which we have
accurate monthly observations. In contrast, in our database the number of
members is updated only a few times a year.

30. Table 12 in Appendix C features the FE estimates.

14. One hundred members need to be present to conduct elections. The
sizes of the local governing body are standardized throughout the
network. In practice however, these sizes may slightly deviate from their
target values due to unexpected circumstances.

31. Likewise, Kurtulus and Tomaskovic-Devey (2012) show that female
top managers promote gender diversity in mid-level management
positions.

15. Before 2003, the local staﬀ was partly recruited by local boards.
Centralization is supposed to ensure that wage policy is consistent and
that staﬀ are independent from the local authorities (Tutunji & Serres,
2005).

32. Brie`re and Szafarz (2015) mention that
the convergence of
microﬁnance toward mainstream ﬁnance can be accompanied by a
reduction in the proportion of female borrowers served.

448

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

33. The book “Women in Management Worldwide” edited by Davidson
and Burke (2011) oﬀers interesting international comparisons. However,
the only African country present in the survey is South Africa.

35. Garcı´a-Pen˜alosa and Konte (2014) suggest that fear of conﬂict could
explain why African women are reluctant to support democracy as
strongly as men do.

34. Matsa and Miller (2013) show that the Norwegian ﬁrms aﬀected by
the 2006 gender quota (i.e., at least 40% women in the board of publicly
traded companies) undertook fewer workforce reductions.

REFERENCES

Adams, R. B., & Ferreira, D. (2009). Women in the boardroom and their
impact on governance and performance. Journal of Financial Eco-
nomics, 94(2), 291–309.

D’Espallier, B., Gue´rin, I., & Mersland, R. (2013). Focus on women in
microﬁnance institutions. Journal of Development Studies, 49(5),
589–608.

Agier, I., & Szafarz, A. (2013a). Microﬁnance and gender: Is there a glass

D’Espallier, B., Hudon, M., & Szafarz, A. (2013). Unsubsidized micro-

ceiling on loan size?. World Development, 42, 165–181.

ﬁnance institutions. Economics Letters, 120(2), 174–176.

Agier, I., & Szafarz, A. (2013b). Subjectivity in credit allocation to micro-
entrepreneurs: Evidence from Brazil. Small Business Economics, 41(1),
263–275.

Armenda´riz, B., & Morduch, J. (2010). The economics of microﬁnance.

Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Armenda´riz, B., & Szafarz, A. (2011). On mission drift in microﬁnance
institutions. In B. Armendariz, & M. Labie (Eds.), The handbook of
microﬁnance (pp. 341–366). London-Singapore: World Scientiﬁc Pub-
lishing.

BCEAO. (2012). Le secteur de la microﬁnance dans l’UMOA depuis 1992.

Dakar, Senegal: Banque Centrale des Etats de l’Afrique de l’Ouest.

BCEAO. (2013). Statistics. December, Dakar, Senegal.
Beaman, L., Duﬂo, E., Pande, R., & Topalova, P. (2011). Political
reservation and substantive representation: Evidence from Indian
village councils. In S. Bery, B. Bosworth, & A. Panagariya (Eds.), India
Policy Forum 2010–11 (Vol. 7), pp. 159–191.

Benz, M. (2005). Not for the proﬁt, but for the satisfaction? Evidence on

worker well-being in non-proﬁt ﬁrms. Kyklos, 58(2), 155–176.

Bernardi, R. A., Bosco, S. M., & Columb, V. L. (2009). Does female
representation on boards of directors associate with the ‘most ethical
companies’ list?. Corporate Reputation Review, 12, 270–280.

Boehe, D. M., & Cruz, L. B.

(2013). Gender and microﬁnance
performance: Why does the institutional context matter?. World
Development, 47, 121–135.

Boucher, S., Barham, B., & Branch, B. (1993). Financial market niche:
Member behavior proﬁle credit unions in Guatemala, 1987–1992.
World Council of credit unions research monograph series. Madison,
Wisconsin.

Branisa, B., Klasen, S., & Ziegler, M. (2013). Gender inequality in social
institutions and gendered development outcomes. World Development,
45, 252–268.

Brie`re, M., & Szafarz, A. (2015). Does commercial microﬁnance belong to
the ﬁnancial sector? Lessons from the stock market. World Develop-
ment, 67, 110–125.

Buttner, E. H. (2001). Examining female entrepreneurs’ management style:
An application of a relational frame. Journal of Business Ethics, 29(3),
253–269.

Chapelle, A., & Szafarz, A. (2005). Controlling ﬁrms through the majority

voting rule. Physica A, 355, 509–529.

Chattopadhyay, R., & Duﬂo, E. (2004). Women as policy makers:
Evidence from a randomized policy experiment in India. Econometrica,
72(5), 1409–1443.

Corne´e, S., & Szafarz, A. (2014). Vive la diﬀe´rence: Social banks and
reciprocity in the credit market. Journal of Business Ethics, 125,
361–380.

Cornforth, C.

(2004). The governance of cooperatives and mutual
associations: A paradox perspective. Annals of Public and Cooperative
Economics, 75(1), 11–32.

Creevey, L. E. (1991). The impact of Islam on women in Senegal. Journal

of Developing Areas, 25(3), 347–368.

Cuadrado, I., Navas, M., Ferrer, E., & Morales, J. F. (2012). Gender
diﬀerences in leadership styles as a function of subordinates’ sex and
type of organization. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 42,
3083–3113.

D’Espallier, B., Gue´rin, I., & Mersland, R. (2011). Women and repayment
in microﬁnance: A global analysis. World Development, 39(5), 758–772.

Das, P. (2014). Women’s participation in community-level water gover-
nance in urban India: The gap between motivation and ability. World
Development, 64, 206–218.

Davidson, M. J., & Burke, R. J. (Eds.) (2011). Women in management
worldwide: Progress and prospects (2nd ed.). Farnham, UK: Gower
Publishing Ltd..

Deaton, A. S. (1997). The analysis of household surveys: A microeconomic
approach to development policy. Baltimore and London: World Bank
Publication, Johns Hopkins University Press.

Desrochers, M., & Fischer, K. P. (2005). The power of networks:
Integration and ﬁnancial cooperative performance. Annals of Public
and Cooperative Economics, 76(3), 307–354.

Direction de la Microﬁnance. (2013). Rapport sur la situation globale du
secteur de la microﬁnance au 30 juin 2013. Dakar, Senegal: Comite´
National de Coordination des activite´s de microﬁnance.

Dobbins, G. H., & Platz, S. J. (1986). Sex diﬀerences in leadership: How

real are they?. Academy of Management Review, 11(1), 118–127.

Druskat, V. U. (1994). Gender and leadership style: Transformational and
transactional leadership in the Roman Catholic Church. Leadership
Quarterly, 5(2), 99–119.

Duﬂo, E. (2012). Women’s empowerment and economic development.

Journal of Economic Literature, 50(4), 1051–1079.

Eagly, A. H. (1987). Sex diﬀerences in social behavior: A social-role

interpretation. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Eagly, A. H., & Carli, L. L. (2003). The female leadership: An evaluation

of the evidence. Leadership Quarterly, 14(6), 807–834.

Eagly, A. H., & Johannesen-Schmidt, M. C. (2001). The leadership styles

of women and men. Journal of Social Issues, 57(4), 1540–1560.

Eagly, A. H., & Johnson, B. T. (1990). Gender and leadership style: A

meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 108(2), 233–256.

Eagly, A. H., & Karau, S. J. (2002). Role congruity theory of prejudice

toward female leaders. Psychological Review, 109(3), 573–598.

Fine, M. G.

(2009). Women’s leaders’ discursive constructions of

leadership. Women’s Studies in Communication, 32(2), 180–202.

Fletschner, D. (2009). Rural women’s access to credit: Market imperfec-
tions and intra-household dynamics. World Development, 37(3),
618–631.

Forsyth, D. R., Heiney, M. M., & Wright, S. S. (1997). Biases in
appraisals of women leaders. Group Dynamics: Theory, Research, and
Practice, 1(1), 98–103.

Franceschet, S., & Piscopo, J. M. (2008). Gender quotas and women’s
substantive representation: Lessons from Argentina. Politics and
Gender, 4(3), 393–425.

Ganle, J. K., Afriyie, K., & Segbeﬁa, A. Y.

(2015). Microcredit:
Empowerment and disempowerment of rural women in Ghana. World
Development, 66, 335–345.

Garcı´a-Pen˜alosa, C., & Konte, M. (2014). Why are women less democratic
than men? Evidence from Sub-Saharan African countries. World
Development, 59, 104–119.

Garikipati, S. (2008). The impact of lending to women on household
vulnerability and women’s empowerment: Evidence from India. World
Development, 36(12), 2620–2642.

Goldman, M. J., & Little, J. S. (2015). Innovative grassroots NGOs and
the complex process of women’s empowerment: An empirical inves-
tigation from Northern Tanzania. World Development, 66, 762–777.

Gue´rin, I. (2008). Women and money: Lessons from Senegal. Development

and Change, 37(3), 549–570.

WOMEN LEADERS AND SOCIAL PERFORMANCE: EVIDENCE FROM FINANCIAL COOPERATIVES IN SENEGAL

449

Hartarska, V., Mersland, R., & Nadolnyak, D. (2014). Are women better
bankers to the poor? Evidence from rural microﬁnance institutions.
American Journal of Agricultural Economics (in press).

Hausman, J. A. (1978). Speciﬁcation tests in econometrics. Econometrica,

46(6), 1251–1271.

Hausman, J. A., & Taylor, W. E. (1981). Panel data and unobservable

individual eﬀects. Econometrica, 49(6), 1377–1398.

Heenan, D., & McLaughlin, R. (2002). Re-assessing the role of credit
unions in community development: A case study of Derry credit union,
Northern Ireland. Community Development Journal, 37(3), 249–259.

Hermes, N., & Lensink, R. (2007). The empirics of microﬁnance: What do

we know?. Economic Journal, 117(517), F1–F10.

Hermes, N., Lensink, R., & Meesters, A. (2011). Outreach and eﬃciency

of microﬁnance institutions. World Development, 39(6), 938–948.

Howson, C. (2013). Adverse incorporation and microﬁnance among cross-

border traders in Senegal. World Development, 42, 199–208.

Hudon, M., & Pe´rilleux, A. (2014). Surplus distribution and character-
istics of social enterprises: Evidence from microﬁnance. Quarterly
Review of Economics and Finance, 54(2), 147–157.

Hudon, M., & Sandberg, J. (2013). The ethical crisis in microﬁnance:
Issues, ﬁndings, and implications. Business Ethics Quarterly, 23,
561–589.

Imai, K. S., Gaiha, R., Thapa, G., & Annim, S. K. (2012). Microﬁnance
and poverty—A macro perspective. World Development, 40(8),
1675–1689.

Jones, D. C., & Kalmi, P. (2015). Membership and performance in ﬁnnish
ﬁnancial cooperatives: A new view of cooperatives? Review of Social
Economy (in press).

Jones, D. C., & Kalmi, P. (2009). Trust, inequality and the size of the
cooperative sector: Cross-country evidence. Annals of Public and
Cooperative Economics, 80(2), 165–195.

Klettner, A., Clarke, T., & Boersma, M. (2014). Strategic and regulatory
approaches to increasing women in leadership: Multilevel targets and
mandatory quotas as levers for cultural change. Journal of Business
Ethics, 122, 145–165.

Kleynjans, L., & Hudon, M. (2014). A study of codes of ethics for
Mexican microﬁnance institutions. Journal of Business Ethics (in
press).

Kolb, J. A. (1999). The eﬀect of gender role, attitude toward leadership,
and self-conﬁdence on leader emergence: Implications for leadership
development. Human Resource Development Quarterly, 10(4), 305–320.
Korabik, K., Baril, G. L., & Watson, C. (1993). Managers’ conﬂict
management style and leadership eﬀectiveness: The moderating eﬀects
of gender. Sex Roles, 29(5–6), 405–420.

Kurtulus, F. D., & Tomaskovic-Devey, D.

Krishnan, H. A., & Park, D. (2005). A few good women—On top
management teams. Journal of Business Research, 58(12), 1712–1720.
(2012). Do female top
managers help women to advance? A panel study using EEO-1
records. Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social
Science, 639(1), 173–197.

Lyon, F., & Humbert, A. L. (2012). Gender balance in the governance of

social enterprise. Local Economy, 27(8), 831–845.

Lyons, M., & Snoxell, S. (2005). Sustainable urban livelihoods and
marketplace social capital: Crisis and strategy in petty trade. Urban
Studies, 42(8), 1301–1320.

Matsa, D. A., & Miller, A. R. (2011). Chipping away at the glass ceiling:
Gender spillovers in corporate leadership. American Economic Review,
101(3), 635–639.

Matsa, D. A., & Miller, A. R. (2013). A female style in corporate
leadership? Evidence from quotas. American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics, 5(3), 136–169.

Mayoux, L. (2001). Tackling the down side: Social capital, women’s
empowerment and micro-ﬁnance in Cameroon. Development and
Change, 32, 435–464.

McKillop, D. G., Briscoe, R., McCarthy, O., Ward, M., & Ferguson, C.
(2003). Irish credit unions: Exploring the gender mix. Voluntas:
International Journal of Voluntary and Nonproﬁt Organizations, 14(3),
339–358.

Meinhard, A. G., & Foster, M. K. (2003). Diﬀerences in the response of
women’s voluntary organizations to shifts in Canadian public policy.
Nonproﬁt and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 32(3), 366–396.

Mersland, R. (2009). The cost of ownership in microﬁnance organizations.

World Development, 37(2), 469–478.

Mersland, R., & Strøm, R. Ø. (2009). Performance and governance in
microﬁnance institutions. Journal of Banking & Finance, 33(4),
662–669.

Moser, C. O. N. (1989). Gender planning in the third world: Meeting
practical and strategic gender needs. World Development, 17(11),
1799–1825.

Noponen, H. (1991). The dynamics of work and survival for the urban
poor: A gender analysis of panel data from Madras. Development and
Change, 22(2), 233–260.

Ogden, S. M., McTavish, D., & McKean, L. (2006). Clearing the way for
gender balance in the management of the UK ﬁnancial services
industry: Enablers and barriers. Women in Management Review, 21(1),
40–53.

O¨ zbilgin, M. F., & Woodward, D. (2004). ‘Belonging’ and ‘otherness’: Sex
equality in banking in Turkey and Britain. Gender, Work & Organi-
zation, 11(6), 668–688.

Pande, R., & Ford, D. (2011). Gender quotas and female leadership: A
review, Harvard University, Background Paper for the World Devel-
opment Report on Gender.

Pe´rilleux, A. (2013). Strategic governance lessons from history for West
African microﬁnance cooperatives: A way to encourage investments in
rural areas. Strategic Change: Brieﬁngs in Entrepreneurial Finance, 22,
95–106.

Pe´rilleux, A., Hudon, M., & Bloy, E. (2012). Surplus distribution in
microﬁnance: Diﬀerences among cooperative, nonproﬁt, and share-
holder forms of ownership. Nonproﬁt and Voluntary Sector Quarterly,
41(3), 386–404.

Perry, D. L. (2005). Wolof women, economic liberalization, and the crisis

of masculinity in rural Senegal. Ethnology, 44(3), 207–226.

Petit, P. (2007). The eﬀects of age and family constraints on gender hiring
discrimination: A ﬁeld experiment in the French ﬁnancial sector.
Labour Economics, 14(3), 371–391.

Razavi, S. (1997). Fitting gender into development institutions. World

Development, 25(7), 1111–1125.

Ryan, M. K., & Haslam, S. A. (2007). The glass cliﬀ: Exploring the
dynamics surrounding the appointment of women to precarious
leadership positions. Academy of Management Review, 32(2), 549–572.
Schreiner, M. (2002). Aspects of outreach: A framework for discussion of
the social beneﬁts of microﬁnance. Journal of International Develop-
ment, 14, 591–603.

Seck, D. (2013). Fifteen years of WAEMU: Results and strategies for the
(Eds.), Wealth through
integration and poverty-reduction strategies in

future. In E. T. Ayuk, & S. T. Kabore´
integration. Regional
West Africa. New York: Springer.

Servet, J.-M. (2011). Corporate responsibility versus social performance
and ﬁnancial inclusion. In B. Armendariz, & M. Labie (Eds.), The
handbook of microﬁnance (pp. 301–322). London-Singapore: World
Scientiﬁc Publishing.

Sheppard, L. D., & Aquino, K. (2014). Sisters in arms. A theory of female
same-sex conﬂict and its problematization in organizations. Journal of
Management (in press).

Silverman, D., Slemrod, J., & Uler, N. (2014). Distinguishing the role of
authority “in” and authority “to”. Journal of Public Economics, 113,
32–42.

Smith, N., Smith, V., & Verner, M. (2006). Do women in top management
aﬀect ﬁrm performance? A panel study of 2,500 Danish ﬁrms.
International Journal of Productivity and Performance Management,
55(7), 569–593.

Smith, W. J., Wokutch, R. E., Harrington, K. V., & Dennis, B. S. (2001).
An examination of the inﬂuence of diversity and stakeholder role on
corporate social orientation. Business & Society, 40, 266–294.

Sow, F. (2003). Fundamentalisms, globalisation and women’s human

rights in Senegal. Gender & Development, 11(1), 69–76.

Strøm, R. Ø., D’Espallier, B., & Mersland, R. (2014). Female leadership,
performance, and governance in microﬁnance institutions. Journal of
Banking & Finance, 42(C), 60–75.

Sturges, J. (1999). What it means to succeed: Personal conceptions of
career success held by male and female managers at diﬀerent ages.
British Journal of Management, 10(3), 239–252.

Tall Ba, S., & Cisse´, W. (2009). Rapport social – Evaluation SPI du re´ seau

PAMECAS. Cerise report.

Tchakoute-Tchuigoua, H. (2010). Is there a diﬀerence in performance by
the legal status of microﬁnance institutions?. Quarterly Review of
Economics and Finance, 50(4), 436–442.

450

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

Teasdale, S., McKay, S., Phillimore, J., & Teasdale, N. (2011). Exploring
gender and social entrepreneurship: Women’s leadership, employment
and participation in the third sector and social enterprises. Voluntary
Sector Review, 2(1), 57–76.

Tutunji, H., & Serres, P. (2005). PAMECAS, Senegal. Planet rating report.

Saint Ouen, France.

van den Heuvel, G., Soeters, J., & Go¨ssling, T. (2014). Global business,
global responsibilities. Corporate social responsibility orientations
within a multinational bank. Business and Society, 53(3), 378–413.

Vecchio, R. P. (2002). Leadership and gender advantage. Leadership

Quarterly, 13, 643–671.

Vecchio, R. P.

(2003). In search of gender advantage. Leadership

Quarterly, 14, 835–850.

Waldman, D. A., Siegel, D. S., & Javidan, M. (2006). Components of
CEO transformational leadership and corporate social responsibility.
Journal of Management Studies, 43(8), 1703–1725.

WBI.

(2011). World Bank

Indicators,

Statistics

for

2011.

<http://data.worldbank.org/indicator>.

Wyndow, P., Li, J., & Mattes, E. (2013). Female empowerment as a core
driver of democratic development: A dynamic panel model from 1980
to 2005. World Development, 52, 34–54.

APPENDIX A. LC CHARACTERISTICS

Table 8. LC general characteristics (May 2010)

LC

MEC YD
MEC Bargny
MEC REST
MEC Plateau
MEC ZOR
MEC MBAO
MEC TG
MEC DIAM
MEC ZOMA
MEC ZONY
MEC IB
MEC GR
MEC NI
MEC MAC
MEC KAW
MEC ZON
MEC ZOG
MEC REL
MEC PAG
MEC OUAKAM
MEC NGOR
MEC SOM
MEC BT
MEC CDGY
MEC PA
MEC Y
MEC MBOUR
MEC THIES
MEC TIVAOUANE
MEC Touba
MEC Louga
MEC Dahra
MEC Kebemer
MEC Saint-Louis
MECRT Richard-Tall
MEC NDIOUM

Mean value

Region

Ruﬁsque
Ruﬁsque
Ruﬁsque
Ruﬁsque
Ruﬁsque

Pikine
Pikine
Pikine
Pikine
Pikine
Pikine
Pikine
Pikine
Pikine

Gue´diawaye
Gue´diawaye
Gue´diawaye
Gue´diawaye
Gue´diawaye

Dakar
Dakar
Dakar
Dakar
Dakar
Dakar
Dakar
Thies
Thies
Thies
Touba
Louga
Louga
Louga

Saint-Louis
Saint-Louis
Saint-Louis

Location

Rural

Periurban
Periurban
Periurban
Periurban
Periurban

Urban
Urban

Periurban

Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban
Urban

Periurban

Urban

Periurban

Urban

Periurban

Rural

Periurban

Urban
Rural
Rural

Creation date

Total asset (in EURk)

1998
1996
1996
1996
1996
1999
1999
1996
1996
1996
1997
1996
1996
2000
1996
1996
1996
1997
1996
1997
1999
1998
1998
1999
1999
2006
2003
2004
2004
2007
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006

901
1,503
989
1,408
1,257
975
1,178
1,545
2,011
1,714
2,570
1,128
1,629
1,280
1,255
1,503
1,444
942
2,135
2,593
737
963
2,500
2,281
1,661
2,055
3,410
4,758
1,599
1,630
1,454
860
945
1,212
705
651

1,594

WOMEN LEADERS AND SOCIAL PERFORMANCE: EVIDENCE FROM FINANCIAL COOPERATIVES IN SENEGAL

451

LC

Members

Governance

Loans

Table 9. LC social characteristics (May 2010)

Total

Share of female

Share of female board

members

members

Female top

manager

Share of female

Average loan size

borrowers

(EUR)

MEC YD
MEC Bargny
MEC REST
MEC Plateau
MEC ZOR
MEC MBAO
MEC TG
MEC DIAM
MEC ZOMA
MEC ZONY
MEC IB
MEC GR
MEC NI
MEC MAC
MEC KAW
MEC ZON
MEC ZOG
MEC REL
MEC PAG
MEC OUAKAM
MEC NGOR
MEC SOM
MEC BT
MEC CDGY
MEC PA
MEC Y
MEC MBOUR
MEC THIES
MEC Tivaouane
MEC Touba
MEC Louga
MEC Dahra
MEC Kebemer
MEC Saint-Louis
MEC Richard-Tall
MEC NDIOUM

Mean value

4,626
12,644
10,531
9,942
10,037
7,240
6,519
13,973
17,184
15,907
20,212
9,875
14,589
7,387
10,737
11,758
11,673
7,121
14,560
13,785
4,147
8,345
19,228
18,336
15,210
5,819
24,055
29,825
10,772
10,857
5,569
4,141
4,000
5,634
3,585
3,371

11,200

a Data from December 2009.

0.47
0.52
0.53
0.57
0.48
0.46
0.49
0.55
0.46
0.51
0.58
0.51
0.49
0.55
0.46
0.53
0.49
0.53
0.56
0.47
0.38
0.47
0.51
0.50
0.54
0.38
0.48
0.57
0.59
0.83
0.49
0.62
0.51
0.66
0.53
0.55

0.52

0.32
0.16
0.32
0.58
0.21
0.36
0.32
0.71
0.19
0.53
0.37
0.36
0.17
0.18
0.36
0.26
0.21
0.37
0.45
0.00
0.37a
0.29
0.17
0.00
0.33
0.00
0.47
0.58
0.32
0.36
0.36
0.45
0.27
0.55
0.10
0.45

0.32

1
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0.31

0.49
0.68
0.53
0.63
0.67
0.70
0.29
0.55
0.60
0.68
0.64
0.45
0.75
0.58
0.58
0.58
0.64
0.72
0.64
0.63
0.55
0.66
0.57
0.70
0.74
0.49
0.60
0.55
0.52
0.46
0.47
0.68
0.47
0.55
0.58
0.60

0.59

776
433
756
721
591
941
568
679
796
658
917
825
558
1,055
858
673
808
719
1,369
970
1,072
784
993
908
1,035
1,119
918
610
494
501
1,002
552
576
714
590
520

780

APPENDIX B. ADDITIONAL DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS

Loan type

AFSSEF

Small-business
Personal
Medium-business
In ﬁne

Table 10. Loan typology

Purpose

Share of loan
portfolio (%)

Average loan
size (EUR)

Average duration

(months)

Interest
rate (%)

Speciﬁc loans with lower guarantee to
facilitate female members access to loans
Regular loans for commercial activities
Loans for personal purpose
Larger loans for small enterprises
Loans with bullet repayment to ﬁnance
stockbreeding and agriculture

52.6

33.1
10.4
1.1
2.0

308

813
824
9,486
499

12

13
19
22
8

20a

20
20
20
14b

a Decreasing balance installments.
b Flat balance installments.

452

Share of female borrowers
Average loan size
Share of female managers
Female-dominated board
Share of female members
Total assets

Pearson correlation coeﬃcients:
*** Signiﬁcant at the 1% level.
** Signiﬁcant at the 5% level.

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

Table 11. Correlation matrix

1

1

 0.20***
 0.04
0.18***
0.23***
0.07**

2

1

0.20***
 0.04
 0.26***
0.15***

3

1

 0.16***
 0.31***
 0.04

5

4

1

0.28***
0.24***

1

0.12***

6

1

APPENDIX C. REGRESSIONS WITH GENDER COMBINATIONS

Table 12. Social performance: ﬁxed-eﬀect panel estimation

(1)

Share of female borrowers

(2)

Average loan size

Female-dominated board * female manager

Female-dominated board * male manager

Male-dominated board * female manager

Share of female members

Total assets

Year
Constant

Statistics
N
F-Stat
R2-Within
R2-Between

Robust standard errors reported in parentheses.
*** Signiﬁcant at the 1% level.
** Signiﬁcant at the 5% level.

0.0413***
(0.0119)
0.0168**
(0.00661)
 0.0384***
(0.00880)
 0.0336
(0.0794)
 1.54e 06
(1.52e 05)

Yes

0.709***
(0.0488)

1,158
20.57***
0.115
0.0363

 99.06***
(17.59)
 16.84
(23.30)
42.29**
(17.43)
108.2
(177.7)
0.0658
(0.0513)

Yes

506.5***
(133.9)

1,158
21.68***
0.0220
0.0872

Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

ScienceDirect

