Extending reach to strengthen value chains: 

Increasing consumer awareness of quality Senegal River valley rice 

 

A.C. Rizzotto* and M. Demont 

Africa Rice Center (AfricaRice), B.P. 96, Saint-Louis, Senegal. 

 
Abstract 
In 2008, the World Bank’s World Development Report propelled agriculture to the forefront of the international 
development discourse for the first time in over two decades. That same year, responding to skyrocketing world 
cereal  prices,  Senegal  developed  a  national  self-sufficiency  initiative  called  GOANA  (Grand  Offensive  in 
Agriculture  for  Food  and  Abundance).  Like  other  programs  that  see  agriculture  as  the  way  forward  for 
developing countries, GOANA focuses almost exclusively on production. The critical question is not whether 
Senegalese  policy-makers  can  meet  its  ambitious  target  of  self-sufficiency  in  rice  production,  but  if  they  do, 
how then will local rice reach consumers? This question may be answered by the concept of a value chain: a 
strategic vertical alliance of non-adversarial relationships between stakeholders within a product’s supply chain. 
The common target of all stakeholders in Senegal’s rice sector is to make local rice competitive with imported 
rice, thereby stimulating import substitution, national self-sufficiency and food security. The sector, however, 
lacks  quality  control,  availability  in  important  urban  markets  and  product  recognition.  Evidence  from  end-
market studies reveals that a substantial proportion of urban consumers are unaware that quality local rice even 
exists.  Therefore,  we  highlight  the  role  of  generic  promotion  strategies  in  increasing  the  awareness  of  urban 
consumers  in  order  to  strengthen  emerging  value  chains  of  quality  rice.  Furthermore,  we  argue  that  policy-
makers and stakeholders need to progressively upgrade the rice supply chain by: (i) investing in infrastructure to 
ensure  post-harvest  product  quality,  and  (ii)  adopting  sector-wide  value  chain  strategies  that  enhance  chain 
competitiveness. Until we address these shortcomings, the promise of quality local rice as a viable competitor 
for imported rice may be no more than a potential unfulfilled. 
 
Introduction 
Senegal started to develop its domestic rice industry in the early 1980s. Cheap imported rice became a staple of 
the Senegalese diet during the colonial era, when it was used to feed the ever-important groundnut labor force. 
With a growing urban population in the 1980s and 1990s, rice overtook millet and sorghum as the main staple 
cereal in cities because it cooks quickly and is relatively easy to prepare. By 2000, Senegal was importing more 
than  one  million  tonnes  (mt)  of  rice  per  year,  or  approximately  70 kg  per  capita.  With  one  of  the  highest 
urbanization rates in Africa (3.1% annually; UN, 2007, p 24), the Senegalese appetite for rice as a convenience 
food is unlikely to diminish. According to the French Development Agency (AFD), the demand for imported 
rice increased by 2% per year from 1998 to 2008. If the trend continues, demand will exceed  2 mt by 2020 
(Gergely and Baris, 2009). To ensure food security, Senegal needs to cover more than the 20% of demand that it 
currently can with its domestic production. 
 
Until recently, the Senegalese government and most donors focused almost all rice development efforts on 
production. This exclusive focus on production is an enormous hindrance to the competitiveness of local rice. 
Since the 1980s, the Senegalese government has invested in fertilizer, finance and infrastructure for production 
through  its  agricultural  extension  agency  (Société  d’aménagement  et  d’exploitation  des  terres  du  Delta  du 
Flueve Sénégal et des vallées du Fleuve Sénégal et de la Falémé, SAED), but has failed to provide the support 
necessary to make Senegal River valley (SRV) rice a viable commercial competitor. Senegalese producers sell 
only  30%  of  their  production  commercially  (Campbell  et al.,  2009,  p  27).  By  ignoring  integral  components 
further downstream in the supply chain, like processing and marketing, some of the upstream investment efforts 
may not yield the anticipated return due to inefficiency losses, jeopardizing the national objective of combating 
import dependency and food insecurity. The entire mindset of the rice supply chain may need to be revisited so 
that it can evolve into one or several value chains focused on economic viability and competitiveness. In order 
to transform the rice sector from a poorly organized, barely profitable industry into a competitive mechanism to 
raise  thousands  out  of  poverty  and  contribute  to  food  security,  both  horizontal  and  vertical  linkages  must  be 
created  and  strengthened.  Horizontal  linkages  need  to  occur  among  producers,  traders  and  processors  alike, 
thereby enabling them to aggregate an adequate supply of consistent quality and variety to sell and market to 
important urban markets like Saint-Louis, Diourbel, Touba and, most of all, Dakar. 
 
Senegalese  President  Abdoulaye  Wade  launched  the  Grand  Offensive  in  Agriculture  for  Food  and 
Abundance (GOANA) in 2008 as a response to the mounting food crisis. While GOANA and the subsequent 
national  self-sufficiency  strategy,  Programme  national  d’autosuffisance  en  riz  (PNAR),  have  ambitious  aims 
and promising strategies to bolster production, they suffer from the same flaws as past programs and attempts 
by the government to develop the rice sector. The Senegalese government has stated that it aims to cover 45% of 
                                                 
* Corresponding author (email: amy.rizzotto@gmail.com).  

 

Second Africa Rice Congress, Bamako, Mali, 22–26 March 2010: Innovation and Partnerships to Realize Africa’s Rice Potential 

3.1.1 

Theme 3: Developing competitive rice value chains 

Rizzotto & Demont: Increasing consumer awareness of quality Senegal River valley rice 

rice consumption needs with local rice by 2015. In addition to their production focus, both GOANA and PNAR 
largely fail to acknowledge the importance of the private sector and end-markets in the growth of the domestic 
rice industry. If production does increase at the rates prescribed in both plans, who will buy the rice? Research 
indicates that less than 60% of consumers in Senegal’s urban zones (Dakar, Diourbel, Touba, Saint-Louis and 
Podor) are aware that local rice even exists. In addition, 30% of urban consumers perceive local rice to be of a 
much lower quality than imported broken rice  (Fall et al., 2007, p 22). The domestic rice industry has some 
significant  challenges  to  overcome  in  terms  of  awareness  and  consumer  perceptions  before  it  brings  an 
increased quantity to market. To accomplish the ambitious goals outlined in the GOANA and PNAR programs, 
the Senegalese government will need to broaden its strategic scope to transform the entire rice value chain. 
 
The good news is that there is not only hope for, but also great potential in the domestic rice industry in 
Senegal.  With  renewed  attention  to  agricultural  development  in  Africa,  Senegal  is  at  a  crossroads  with 
opportunity. The question now is how to proceed, and value chain research may provide some answers. The 
value chain approach to market research is a holistic methodology that takes into account all firms in a market 
system — this is especially important for finding ways to make staple food commodity markets in developing 
countries more competitive at every stage. When staple food commodity markets are more competitive they will 
contribute to self-sufficiency, food security and income growth. By focusing research and development efforts 
on  value  chains,  the  irrigated  rice  sector  can  focus  on  end-market  strategies  without  sacrificing  increased 
productivity.  
  Much has already been written about the problems and constraints confronting irrigated rice growers in the 
SRV, but little attention has been paid to the end-market challenges of consumer preferences for imported rice, 
their lack of awareness of local rice, and their general perception of domestic rice as being of lower quality than 
imported varieties. This paper responds to this gap in the research and highlights potential strategies to combat 
end-market issues using the value chain approach to agricultural development. 
 
Value chain upgrading 
The  main  premise  behind  a  value  chain  is  to  eliminate  inefficiencies  in  a  product’s  supply  chain  from 
production to consumption in order to generate higher profits and create mutually beneficial outcomes for all the 
stakeholders involved. In a value chain, it is in all stakeholders’ best interests to work cooperatively with open 
communication and transparency. Creating and strengthening value chains in the Senegalese irrigated rice sector 
may prove to be a good solution for increasing competitiveness, reducing import dependency and contributing 
to food security, because it addresses what past plans have failed to acknowledge — end-markets and private-
sector actors. Value chains seek to streamline output channels by linking producers to consumers and weeding 
out inefficiencies along the way. When stakeholders are acting communally and not purely out of self-interest, 
they are less likely to clog output channels with unnecessary logistics and bureaucratic obstructions. GOANA 
and  PNAR  remain  important  initiatives  that  bring  much  needed  attention  and  funding  to  research  and 
development in irrigated rice production, thus value chain upgrading is simply a complementary approach to 
complete the development picture. Without improved production the product will never gain in value because 
baseline  value  is  created  during  the  production  stage.  As  you  go  further  upstream,  however,  value  chain 
upgrading  may  help  to  ensure  that  value  is  added  through  improved  processing,  storage,  transportation, 
packaging and branding. Though each element of a value chain deserves a deeper evaluation, this paper focuses 
on the elements most closely linked to consumption: advertising and generic promotion. We concentrated on 
this research area because of the significant lack of awareness of quality SRV rice. 
 
The state of awareness 
When it comes to consumer awareness of local rice, experimental auctions have confirmed earlier surveys (Fall 
and Diagne, 2008; Fall et al., 2007) showing an awareness gap of over 40% in Dakar, Senegal’s largest urban 
center. Of the roughly 60% of consumers in Dakar that are aware of rice produced in the SRV, it is unclear how 
many of these people are aware of the quality rice varieties that are now available on the market. This awareness 
gap can be explained by several phenomena.  
 
A recent survey of urban consumers in Senegal revealed that the number one reason for the weakness of 
local rice consumption is the lack of marketing, cited by 45% of the sample. A lack of marketing means a lack 
of recognition, which also shows a lack of effective communication promoting local rice. The second reason, 
cited by 30% of the sample, is the perceived lack of quality. The third reason is the lack of availability on the 
market,  cited  by  26%  of  the  sample  (Fall  et al.,  2007,  p  44–45).  Fall  et al.  (2007)  emphasize  that  national 
policies need to gear marketing efforts toward urban consumers. They also encourage policy reform that will 
improve the rice value chain, which includes gaining better knowledge of consumer preferences, increasing the 
visibility and recognition of quality SRV rice, and investing in the infrastructure to help bring quality SRV rice 
to  urban  markets.  Urban  markets  are  the  most  important  demographic  to  target  because  they  represent 
approximately 65% of rice consumers in Senegal (Fall and Diagne, 2008, p 2). 

3.1.2 

Second Africa Rice Congress, Bamako, Mali, 22–26 March 2010: Innovation and Partnerships to Realize Africa’s Rice Potential 

Theme 3: Developing competitive rice value chains 

Rizzotto & Demont: Increasing consumer awareness of quality Senegal River valley rice 

Fall et al.’s (2007) survey and experimental auctions are not the only research to suggest the necessity of 
 
investment in generic promotion and advertising. Norman et al. (2008, p 720) say that advertising is essential to 
stimulate demand for a product because it, “can affect consumer willingness to pay without changing underlying 
consumer  preferences”.  Data  from  our  experimental  auctions  support  this  claim,  pointing  to  an  increased 
likelihood  of  purchasing  quality  SRV  rice  when  consumers  are  aware  of  it.  According  to  Rutsaert  et  al. 
(personal communication, 2009), after being introduced to quality SRV rice, Senegalese consumers in Dakar 
and Saint-Louis are willing to pay a price premium of 45 FCFA/kg relative to imported rice. They are further 
willing to add 17 FCFA/kg for PINORD’s (Plateforme des initiatives du nord) Rival®-labeled rice. Although 
consumer  preferences  are  deeply  embedded  in  societal  norms  and  market  behavior,  advertising  and  generic 
promotion may accelerate the transformation of these preferences and encourage consumers to ‘go local’ when 
selecting rice for their families.  
 
Advertising and generic promotion 
The development world is beginning to catch on to the idea that the development of agricultural commodity 
markets requires an integrative approach. In Senegal, this is demonstrated by a joint development report on rice 
value chains in west Africa spearheaded by USAID, which highlights the need for demand-focused strategies in 
west African rice sectors. The report acknowledges that prominent international institutions, “should prioritize 
support for research into consumer demand and preferences for local rice” (Wolfe et al., 2009, p iii). There have 
been  too  few  studies  like  those  conducted  by  Rutsaert  et al.  (personal  communication,  2009)  and  Fall  et al. 
(2007). Though limited in scale, these studies provide valuable information for the course of future research and 
may inform policy-makers and private-sector actors on how to better target their development efforts.  
  With  such  a  significant  lack  of  awareness  of  quality  SRV  rice  in  Senegal,  it  seems  that  one  of  the  best 
places to begin transforming the rice industry is with advertising and generic promotion. Norman et al. (2008) 
treat advertising as a complement to a product, saying that it can strengthen a product’s appeal in two ways: 
extending reach and building value. According to Norman et al. (2008, p 722), reach is “when you contribute 
more  information  to  consumers  to  raise  their  awareness”.  When  you  extend  the  reach  of  a  product  you  are 
informing  greater  numbers  of  people  about  the  product’s  existence.  In  order  to  decrease  the  awareness  gap, 
increase consumer demand, and bolster the competitiveness of local rice, reach must be extended to a greater 
proportion of rice’s most important audience. According to Fall and Diagne (2008, p 5), urban women between 
the ages of 18 and 60 should be the target demographic of generic promotion and advertising efforts, since they, 
as  household  managers,  are  the  most  likely  to  purchase  rice.  Television  and  radio  will  likely  be  the  most 
successful  reach  mechanisms  given  that  52%  of  urban  households  own  televisions  and  88%  own  radios 
(Montgomery and Hewett, 2005). Grassroots-style marketing can also be extremely effective in a setting like 
Senegal. According to importer Marieme Diouck, when she first introduced imported aromatic rice she focused 
her marketing efforts on tastings and the distribution of samples in local markets  (personal interview, 2010). 
Diouck’s approach clearly paid off because her imported aromatic rice in the well-known blue ‘Royal Umbrella’ 
sack is now one of the most popular varieties in the Dakar markets. 
In  addition  to  extending  reach,  advertising  can  also  complement  a  product  by  building  value  through 
 
widespread product recognition that connects the product with a certain image or concept. Building value is also 
most effective with a differentiated product, like quality SRV broken rice. Rice is not a homogeneous product 
and advertisers will need to exploit the differences in quality and type in order to distinguish their product. If a 
product is given a brand name its identity grows stronger and advertising focused on building value can be even 
more  persuasive.  Batra  et al. (2000)  further  support  Norman  et al.’s  concept  of  building  value,  saying  that 
advertising can add value to a product by transforming it into a “status good”. Through advertising, a product 
becomes  widely  known  and  often,  the  more  recognized  a  product  is  the  higher  its  associated  ‘status’. 
Advertisers  have  to  be  cautious,  however,  that  their  product  represents  the  quality  standards  they  promote, 
otherwise promotion could serve to undermine their objectives.  
Building  value  by  linking  quality  SRV  rice  with  the  concept  of  status  holds  great  potential  in  Senegal 
 
because it, like many developing countries, is a society where status is important. The Senegalese show their 
status through the clothes they wear, the cell phones they use, and the televisions they buy. According to Batra 
et al. (2000),  in  periods  of  economic  development,  status  is  of  great  importance  because  there  is  often  huge 
economic disparity and consequently social mobility. In a developing country, the easiest way to prove that you 
are moving up the socioeconomic ladder is to show your status through your material possessions.  
The  question  then  is  how  to  make  quality  SRV  rice  into  a  status  good?  Value  may  be  added  by 
 
simultaneously improving quality and making it ‘in’ to buy quality SRV rice. As stated before, a key element in 
making  quality  SRV  rice  a  status  good  is  creating  a  distinguishable  identity.  The  Oxfam-funded  initiative 
PINORD is the first organization in Senegal to have a trademarked brand name for a quality local rice product, 
Rival®.  For  a  one-time  payment  of  500 000 FCFA  to  OAPI  (the  African  Organization  for  the  Protection  of 
Industrial Property), PINORD now has greater control over and ownership of its brand. Having a solid brand 

 

Second Africa Rice Congress, Bamako, Mali, 22–26 March 2010: Innovation and Partnerships to Realize Africa’s Rice Potential 

3.1.3 

Theme 3: Developing competitive rice value chains 

Rizzotto & Demont: Increasing consumer awareness of quality Senegal River valley rice 

identity  attaches  not  only  a  tangible  image  to  a  product,  but  may  also  contribute  to  the  creation  of  status  if 
promotion campaigns successfully manage to attach this concept to the brand.  
 
Quality enhancement and availability 
PINORD was launched in 2006 with the mission “to contribute to the food security of the Senegalese people by 
improving their living conditions in a sustainable way through the promotion of local rice” (PINORD, 2009b, p 
9).  The  initiative  partners  with  six  organizations  in  the  SRV,  private-sector  donors,  and  a  variety  of  other 
stakeholders to improve the irrigated rice sector. PINORD aims to (i) increase market access for SRV rice, (ii) 
reinforce  the  organizational  capacity  of  rice  growers  and  producer  coalitions,  and  (iii)  increase  female 
entrepreneurship in the sector. Its collaborative approach to tackling the challenges and constraints confronting 
the SRV irrigated-rice sector is in line with value chain principles of supply chain management. PINORD not 
only  links  rice  growers  horizontally  through  producer  organizations,  but  also  links  production,  processing, 
distribution, marketing and consumption vertically through its brand, Rival®.  
From its inception, PINORD recognized the total absence of marketing for local rice as a major obstacle to 
 
the  mobilization  of  quality  SRV  rice  on  the  market.  PINORD’s  promotion  strategy  is  four-fold:  improved 
packaging, improved transport, increased availability and points of sale in urban markets (especially in Dakar), 
and  multimedia  publicity  surrounding  the  Rival®  label  (PINORD,  2007,  p  53).  This  strategy  addresses  the 
awareness gap, perceived lack of quality, and lack of availability in urban markets — all issues raised by recent 
surveys and research. PINORD’s strategy to render quality SRV rice more competitive on the market vis-à-vis 
imported  broken  rice  through  supply  aggregation,  quality  enhancement,  improved  distribution  channels,  and 
marketing,  is  an  ambitious  and  innovative  example  of  an  agricultural  development  strategy  for  the  SRV  rice 
sector  that  goes  above  and  beyond  investment  in  production  alone.  Already,  80%  of  the  rice  produced  by 
PINORD  farmers  reaches  the  market,  which  far  surpasses  the  proportion  brought  to  market  by  other, 
nonaffiliated  producers  in  the  area  (PINORD,  2009a).  While  PINORD’s  model  for  the  increased 
commercialization  of  quality  SRV  rice  is  certainly  a  good  preliminary  step  toward  competitiveness,  its 
operational scale is currently too small to impact the market significantly.  
Another  development  organization  operating  within  the  framework  of  value  chain  principles  is  Japan 
 
International Cooperation Agency (JICA). Since 2004, JICA has been working in Senegal to develop the rice 
industry. From production to consumption, the Agency has launched initiatives to improve the capacity of the 
full  range  of  irrigated  rice  stakeholders.  JICA  has  attempted  to  address  a  plethora  of  issues  including 
productivity, technology transfer, quality enhancement, access to credit, distribution and marketing. While JICA 
focuses a majority of its efforts on production and processing, it acknowledges the importance of end-market 
operations. Like PINORD, JICA developed a quality SRV rice brand called SENRIZ, which was launched in 
2005  and  made  available  in  limited  supply  to  several  urban  zones,  including  Dakar,  Touba  and  Kaolack. 
Initially, SENRIZ reached the shelves of major supermarket franchises and appeared in several national press 
articles. Unfortunately, SENRIZ has since disappeared from the urban landscape, demonstrating the necessity of 
promotion and scaling-up in order to capture a profitable and competitive share of the rice market. SENRIZ’s 
failure has encouraged JICA to approach future development initiatives with a focus on incremental upgrading 
and sustainability (Sugiyama, personal interview, 2010). 
Efforts to improve the competitiveness of quality SRV rice through differentiated brand images like Rival® 
 
and  SENRIZ  are  incredibly  important  steps  toward  increasing  the  profitability  of  the  irrigated-rice  sector  in 
Senegal.  By  applying  value  chain  principles  to  their  supply  chains,  PINORD  and  JICA  help  to  bridge  the 
awareness gap and increase demand for quality SRV rice. Their marketing strategies are moderately successful, 
with mixed results attributable to the limited scale and/or longevity of their operations. In order to realize its 
potential,  the  irrigated  rice  sector  should  invest  more  in  value  chain  upgrading,  end-market  activities,  and 
sustainable project implementation. The question now is: who should spearhead these funding efforts? 
 
Funding 
Until the liberalization of the rice industry in the mid-1990s, SAED was the main marketing organization for the 
irrigated-rice  sector.  However,  typical  of  many  large,  bureaucratic  institutions,  it  was  often  slow  and 
inconsistent  in  marketing  activities.  Corruption  and  strict  licensing  requirements  for  traders  and  wholesalers 
opened the door for what Morris (1988) calls a “parallel, illegal rice supply chain” (p 265). These parallel rice-
marketing systems were run by private investment and profit-motivated individuals, and created a disincentive 
to share marketing information among producers. In the short term these parallel marketing schemes were more 
effective than similar public schemes, but in the long term they could not create the scale needed to be effective 
and were thus unsustainable. These two approaches to rice marketing illustrate a common tension between the 
private  and  public  sectors.  While  the  Government  of  Senegal  has  continued  to  support  production-centered 
R&D, it has never reclaimed its role as the primary marketing organization for the irrigated rice sector.  
 
To  get  a  better  sense  of  different  public  and  private  sector  approaches  to  funding  agricultural  marketing 
activities, we look at examples from Ghana and Nigeria. In Ghana, it is government policy that a portion of 

3.1.4 

Second Africa Rice Congress, Bamako, Mali, 22–26 March 2010: Innovation and Partnerships to Realize Africa’s Rice Potential 

Theme 3: Developing competitive rice value chains 

Rizzotto & Demont: Increasing consumer awareness of quality Senegal River valley rice 

funding for agricultural development goes toward advertising. Norman et al. (2008, p 731) find that mandatory 
programs  to  finance  advertising  “always  increase  social  surplus”  and  “almost  always  raise  welfare”.  The 
Ghanaian government views food security as a public good and therefore believes in the importance of investing 
in generic promotion for locally produced staple food crops. If Ghanaian farmers can sell what they produce and 
help  feed  their  fellow  citizens,  Ghana  will  be  less  dependent  on  imports  and  therefore  less  susceptible  to 
unpredictable market activity.  
 
Senegal  could  imitate  Ghana’s  system  and  make  government  spending  on  generic  promotion  for  the 
irrigated  rice  sector  mandatory,  but  current  governmental  involvement  in  rice  marketing  shows  potential 
challenges to this approach. According to a JICA report, in Senegal too often:  

information on marketing rice is not delivered properly. The collection of the rice market information 
is  under  the  responsibility  of  the  Ministry  of  Commerce,  but  the  collected  information  has  not  been 
delivered  and  utilized  fully.  For  example,  information  on  the  consumers’  taste  on  rice  has  not  been 
transmitted to rice millers and producers. (JICA, 2006, p 121) 

Until the government establishes clearer and more well-defined channels of communication from consumers to 
producers, marketing will be inefficient and ineffective. 
 
In light of the limitations of public sector financing, both Ghana and Nigeria follow a shared private sector 
approach  to  agricultural  marketing  that  may  offer  a  more  promising  model  for  Senegal.  Olam,  the  largest 
regional  rice  importer  in  Nigeria,  has  invested  significantly  in  promoting  local  production  and  marketing  of 
local rice in Nigeria and Ghana. Campbell et al. (2009) support Olam’s approach in Nigeria and Ghana, saying 
that, “one of the most important prerequisites for developing a viable strategy for rice in west Africa will be to 
bring the private sector into the discussion and empowering it to play a meaningful role in both designing and 
implementing  the  strategy”  (p  73).  Though  perhaps  an  unexpected  advocate  for  local  rice,  private-sector 
importers could play a key role in the marketing and promotion of quality SRV rice if they begin to see it as a 
viable competitor to imported rice. 
 
Importers have emerging incentives to invest in the domestic rice industry because of price volatility and 
export policies, which became all too real during the food crisis in 2008. When countries like India and Thailand 
began  placing  restrictions  on  their  exports,  net-importing  countries  realized  the  real  monetary  risks  behind 
import dependency. The realization that the international cereal market is increasingly unstable has led some 
importers  to  begin  gravitating  toward  local  rice.  Prominent  Senegalese  importer  Moustapha  Tall  has  been 
involved in rice importation since the early 1970s and has significantly cut back his investment in the business 
since the 2008 crisis. Tall sees many of his fellow importers involved in a risky and unprofitable ‘race to the 
bottom’ as they try to beat their competitors’ prices and gain more customers. In his words, “the rice importation 
market is flooded and becoming less profitable. I don’t want to be a part of the race to the bottom, going from 
sale  to  sale,  underbidding  my  competitors,  and  earning  meager  profit  margins”  (personal  interview,  2010). 
Uncertainty and dubious profitability can be big motivators for businessmen like Tall. He wants to get involved 
in SRV rice, but like many investors has concerns about quality and supply limitations. 
 
In  addition  to  uncertainty,  another  problem  for  investors  are  pro-farmer  government  policies  that  create 
significant  entry  barriers  and  unforeseen  risks.  Wolfe  et  al.  (2009,  p  30–31)  find  that  this  producer-centric 
government attitude, “undermines the ability of private investors to access land for commercial rice production”, 
and  that,  “government  strategy  does  not  include  incentives  for  existing  commercially-minded  Senegal  River 
Valley  farmers  to  scale-up  production  nor  does  it  encourage  subsistence-oriented  farmers  to  become  more 
commercial”. Thus, the opportunity for importers and other private investors to help increase the capacity and 
scale  of  quality  SRV  rice  initiatives  is  currently  contending  with  some  strong  disincentives,  including  the 
expectation  that  government  policies  that  discourage  commercialization  may  undercut  any  investments  they 
make in the irrigated-rice sector. As Tall expressed, another disincentive is the lack of confidence in product 
quality and quantity, and the weakness of sourcing and distribution channels for quality local rice. If importers 
saw potential in offering quality SRV rice, one way to combat uncertainty in the product might be a small tax of 
2–3 FCFA/kg on imported rice with the revenue going directly toward investment in quality enhancement and 
promotion.  According  to  development  consultants  Gergely  and  Baris  (2009),  Dakar  wholesalers  who  have 
purchased local rice and sorted it have had no trouble selling it, which may indicate potential receptivity and 
involvement of importers. 
 
One  such  importer  who  is  open  to  future  involvement  and  investment,  Marieme  Diouck,  says  that  if 
“Senegal wants to develop the irrigated-rice sector and put the brakes on importation, there needs to be decisive 
and dynamic action” (personal interview, 2010). Diouck believes that it is up to private sector actors to lead this 
effort  because  producers  lack  the  necessary  financial  resources  and  the  State  has  floundered  in  its  previous 
attempts. She is ready to be the catalyst for change once the quality has improved and the quantity is reliable 
and  bountiful.  If  Senegal  wants  to  gradually  replace  rice  imports  with  local  supply  and  become  more  self-
sufficient and food secure, it must first ensure higher quality and more reliable quantity of local rice, giving 
interested investors like Moustapha Tall and Marieme Diouck the confidence to provide the financial means. 

 

Second Africa Rice Congress, Bamako, Mali, 22–26 March 2010: Innovation and Partnerships to Realize Africa’s Rice Potential 

3.1.5 

Theme 3: Developing competitive rice value chains 

Rizzotto & Demont: Increasing consumer awareness of quality Senegal River valley rice 

From  past  government  attempts  at  rice  marketing  and  recent  examples  of  successful  private-sector-led 
 
marketing and promotion, it is clear that the ideal strategy for promoting quality SRV rice will somehow have to 
involve  private  sector  actors.  However,  the  report  by  Wolfe  et  al.  (2009,  p.  24)  cautions  that,  “effectively 
supporting  this  strategy  (which  relies  so  heavily  on  local  ownership,  leadership  and  investment)  will  require 
clear expectations for modest and gradual progress but guarantee greater prospects for sustainability”. As Morris 
(1988)  points  out,  private  sector  actors  are  notoriously  driven  by  short-term  profit  prospects,  which  can 
negatively affect the sustainability of private sector initiatives. For this strategy to succeed, the private sector 
may thus have to learn to measure its success in years, not months. To help private sector actors feel confident 
in an initial investment, Wolfe et al. (2009, p 24) suggest that, “a USAID project could develop an umbrella 
branding strategy for local rice that individual firms could exploit or buy into”. Importers in Senegal already 
have one quality rice brand, Rival®, to source from and several other rice value chains that are being developed. 
Now,  it  is  just  a  matter  of  gaining  confidence  in  the  reliability  and  consistency  of  product  quality  and 
availability. In order to convey this confidence, value chain pioneers like PINORD need to continue with their 
strategies  for  enhancing  quality  and  eliminating  inefficiencies.  In  time,  through  advertising  and  generic 
promotion  efforts,  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  importers  and  other  potential  private  sector  investors  will  see  an 
increasingly stable opportunity for new profits and supporting their local communities. 
 
Conclusions 
Decreasing  the  awareness  gap  through  advertising,  generic  promotion  and  other  value  chain  strengthening 
tactics  can  have  an  impact  on  the  competitiveness  of  quality  SRV  rice.  PINORD  and  JICA  have  begun  to 
develop rice value chains for quality SRV rice, going so far as to offer differentiated brand identities, Rival® 
and SENRIZ. While these efforts are a good start, they are not a panacea. The main challenge confronting these 
initiatives is scale, or the lack thereof, when it comes to the supply and recognition of quality SRV rice. 
  More fundamental is that the SRV is not maximizing its production potential. AFD consultants Gergely and 
Baris (2009) calculate that there are 347 000 ha of irrigable land in the SRV, of which only 135 000 ha are being 
used. This constraint on production potential can largely be explained by the lack of access to credit, land tenure 
issues,  weeds  and  birds,  and  a  lack  of  price  incentives  for  producers.  The  irrigated  rice  sector  in  Senegal  is 
riddled  with  monopolies:  the  government  has  a  monopoly  on  fertilizer  and  the  Caisse  Nationale  de  Crédit 
Agricole  du  Sénégal  (CNCAS)  has  a  monopoly  on  credit.  These  limitations  are  further  compounded  by  the 
requirement  that  farmers  use  certified  seeds  in  order  to  qualify  for  a  CNCAS  loan.  The  certification  process 
itself  is  incredibly  complex  and  thus  exclusionary.  These  monopolies  and  certification  schemes  create  huge 
bureaucratic and institutional inefficiencies, and limit the ability of farmers to scale up their operations.  
  With  such  a  limiting  input  structure,  only  a  third  of  all  irrigated  rice  produced  in  the  SRV  is  sold 
commercially. The rest is sold to informal traders called bana-banas in irregular quantities at sporadic intervals, 
or is used for home consumption. The quantities that farmers do sell are mostly sold in order to recuperate funds 
needed  to  repay  credit  taken  out  prior  to  the  season.  The  informal  trade  with  bana-banas  seriously  weakens 
vertical linkages between producers and traders, but without better chain-wide governance, farmers are left with 
few other options. Farmers have begun to band together through cooperatives with help from organizations like 
PINORD  and  JICA,  who  help  them  to  aggregate  rice  supply  for  commercial  sale.  PINORD  and  JICA  have 
enabled substantial progress in supply chain management, but have yet to help farmers achieve the capacity and 
scale needed to control a significant and profitable market share.  
 
Another natural aggregation point for supply would be with traders and processors, but the lack of capital 
and the prevalence of small quantities, irregular interval trading (bana-banas) again undermines this potential 
by creating major inefficiencies further downstream. In order to combat these inefficient institutions for credit 
and inputs, and a lack of processing infrastructure, Swinnen et al. (2007, p 93) suggest that value chains may be 
put in place to, “assure consistent, reliable, quality, and timely supply” to markets. They say that if a staple food 
commodity sector is to create a big enough surplus and have it properly distributed to markets to contribute to 
economic  growth  and  poverty  alleviation,  private  governance  and  interlinking  of  markets  will  be  essential 
(Swinnen et al., 2007, p 27–28). Again, PINORD and JICA have made substantial headway in this department, 
but their efforts are far from enough to increase the competitiveness of quality SRV rice to a point where it can 
begin to erode import dependency and enhance food security. 
 
Another  problem  of  scale  confronting  the  development  of  the  SRV  irrigated-rice  sector  is  the  extent  of 
consumer awareness and the prevailing trends of consumer preferences for imported broken rice. The average 
household expenditure in urban areas in Senegal is 2500 FCFA per day, 30% of which is spent on rice (Fall and 
Diagne, 2008, p 10). Fall and Diagne (2008, p 11–12) also find that over 90% of urban consumers purchase 
imported broken rice and only 7% purchase local rice. With 60% of the population predicted to be living in 
urban areas by 2020, rice — a staple component of the urban consumer’s diet — is unlikely to experience a 
decline in consumption (Wolfe et al., 2009, p 14). If the Senegalese irrigated rice sector is to survive it will need 
to take a larger share of this essential market. Consumer preferences are deeply embedded in the psyche, but are 
not  unchangeable.  Rice  value  chain  pioneers  must  continue  to  develop  strategies  to  change  the  consumer 

3.1.6 

Second Africa Rice Congress, Bamako, Mali, 22–26 March 2010: Innovation and Partnerships to Realize Africa’s Rice Potential 

Theme 3: Developing competitive rice value chains 

Rizzotto & Demont: Increasing consumer awareness of quality Senegal River valley rice 

mindset  on  local  rice.  Other  private  actors  and  international  organizations  need  to  work  with  value  chain 
initiators  to  increase  the  competitiveness  of  quality  SRV  rice  and  change  Senegal’s  position  as  the  largest 
importer of broken rice in the world (Campbell et al., 2009, p 10). 
  What is at stake goes beyond the livelihoods of SRV rice growers and the economic viability of the irrigated 
rice sector. In the broader context, rice value chain development and upgrading have significant implications for 
food  security,  poverty  alleviation  and  overall  economic  development  in  Senegal  and  the  rest  of  west  Africa. 
Therefore,  initiatives  to  better  understand  and  transform  consumer  preferences  for  rice  are  an  essential 
component of any self-sufficiency or development strategy involving national rice production in Senegal and 
beyond.  
 
References 
Batra R, Ramaswamy V, Alden DL, Steenkamp J-BEM and Ramachander S. 2000. Effects of brand local and 
nonlocal origin on consumer attitudes in developing countries. Journal of Consumer Psychology 9(2): 83–
95. 

Campbell  R,  Schiff  H,  Snodgrass  D,  Downing  J  and  Sturza  D.  2009.  Global  Food  Security  Response:  West 
Africa  Rice  Value  Chain  Analysis.  Agricultural  Cooperative  Development  International/Volunteers  in 
Overseas  Cooperative  Assistance  (ACDI/VOCA),  Development  Alternatives  International  (DAI),  United 
States Agency for International Development (USAID), EcoVentures International, Washington, DC. 

Fall AA, and Diagne A. 2008. Etude de la relation qualite-prix du riz produit dans la vallee du fleuve Senegal. 

Fonds National de Recherches Agricoles et Agro-alimentaires (FNRAA), Cité Air France, Senegal. 

Fall, AA, Fall CAK, Gningue RD, Ndir B and Ndour M. 2007. Etude sur les critères de qualité et les modes de 
consommation du riz au Sénégal. Fonds National de Recherches Agricoles et Agro-alimentaires (FNRAA), 
Cité Air France, Senegal. 

Gergely N and Baris P. 2009. Etude sur la competitivite du riz de la vallee du fleuve du Senegal (VFS) sur les 

marches nationaux et regionaux. Agence Française de Developpement (AFD), Paris. 

JICA (Japan International Cooperation Agency). 2006. The study on the reorganization of the production of rice 

in Senegal. Ministry of Agriculture, Rural Hydraulic and Food Security, Government of Senegal, Dakar. 

Montgomery  MR  and  Hewett  PC.  2005.  Poverty  and  Children’s  Schooling  in  Urban  and  Rural  Senegal. 

Population Council, New York. 

Morris ML. 1988. Parallel rice markets: Policy lessons from northern Senegal. Food Policy 13(3): 257–269. 
Norman G, Pepall L and Richards D. 2008. Generic product advertising, spillovers, and market concentration. 

American Journal of Agricultural Economics 90(3): 719–732. 

PINORD. 2007. Charte de Qualite du Riz de la Vallee du Fleuve Senegal. Plateforme des initiatives du nord 

PINORD. 2009a. Rapport final de validation de la charte de qualité Bengeloune. Plateforme des initiatives du 

(PINORD), Ross Bethio, Senegal. 

nord (PINORD), Ross Bethio, Senegal. p 1–2. 

PINORD.  2009b.  Plan  Strategique  2009-2013 :  Promotion  de  la  securite  alimentaire  par  la  filiere  riz  local 

dans la vallee du Fleuve Senegal. Plateforme des initiatives du nord (PINORD), Ross Bethio, Senegal. 

Rutsaert P, Demont M, Ndour M, Verbekea W, Seck PA and Tollens E. 2009. Paying for quality: Private versus 

collective valuation of Senegal River valley rice. European Review of Agricultural Economics. 

Swinnen JFM, Vandeplas A and Maertens M. 2007. Governance and surplus distribution in commodity value 
chains  in  Africa.  Paper  prepared  for  presentation  at  the  the  106th  seminar  of  the  EAAE,  Pro-poor 
development in low income countries: Food, agriculture, trade, and environment, Montpellier, France, 25–
27 October. 

UN. 2007. Country Profile, Senegal, 2007 Edition. UNdata. United Nations Statistics Division, New York. 
Wolfe J, Jones C and Jain S. 2009. Global Food Security Response: Senegal Rice Study. USAID, Washington, 

DC and JE Austin Associates, Arlington, VA. 

 
 

 

Second Africa Rice Congress, Bamako, Mali, 22–26 March 2010: Innovation and Partnerships to Realize Africa’s Rice Potential 

3.1.7 

