 
 
The Dynamic Nature of Citizenship and Participation: Lessons from Three Rural Senegalese
Case Studies
Author(s): Amy S. Patterson
Source: Africa Today, Vol. 46, No. 1 (Winter, 1999), pp. 3-27
Published by: Indiana University Press
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/4187250
Accessed: 10-12-2020 22:01 UTC
 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/4187250?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms

Indiana University Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access
to Africa Today

This content downloaded from 128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 22:01:04 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The Dynamic Nature of Citizenship
 and Participation: Lessons from Three
 Rural Senegalese Case Studies
 Amy S. Patterson

 This article uses three case studies from rural Senegalese
 communal organizations to examine the dynamic nature of
 citizenship and participation. Citizenship reflects a set of
 expectations about rights and responsibilities that a par-
 ticular community and its members have for one another.
 The work illustrates two conditions under which those
 expectations can change. First, when the community does
 not incorporate inclusive decision-making institutions that
 value the involvement of all participants, individuals may
 question their citizenship rights and exit the community.
 Second, when the community cannot live up to the material
 expectations that members have for it, people may question
 why they must responsibly give time, energy, or resources to
 the community. The article demonstrates how state actors,
 macroeconomic forces, and power relations shape the nature
 of decision-making processes and the ability of the com-
 munity to meet its social contract.

 This paper seeks to examine citizenship and participation in Senegal.' In
 recent years, the citizenship framework has been used to explain ethnic-
 based participation in democratic transitions (Ndegwa 1997), the nature of
 ideological debates during the apartheid struggle in South Africa (Halisi
 1997), and the marginal position of ethnic groups in West Africa (Konneh
 1996). Citizenship defines the members (and, implicitly, non-members) of
 a common society (Barbalet 1988: 1). It directly addresses the rights and
 obligations involved in the relationship between individuals and the com-
 munity and the ways that relationship impacts political participation. Citi-
 zenship reflects a set of expectations that the community and its members
 have for one another.

 This article seeks to empirically test the dynamic nature of citizen-
 ship and to examine the factors that can transform how individuals see
 their rights and obligations in a community. I use research from subna-

This content downloaded from 128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 22:01:04 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 4)

 I
 C
 m

 z

 N

 z
 -4
 a
 4

 m
 z

 I

 0
 z

 -v
 z

 n

 tional communities-two case studies from rural Senegalese organizations
 and one case study from Senegal's national Muslim community. In doing
 so, I take membership in local associations as an indicator of community
 membership. While the three cases are different in scope (local versus na-
 tional), they all illustrate the ways that citizenship and participation can
 change. Though many aspects of the three cases are not unique to Senegal,
 my findings are not intended to be generalized to other regions. Rather, the
 three well-documented cases provide a starting point for critically evaluat-
 ing the dynamic nature of citizenship.

 Because participation reflects the ways that individuals view their
 rights and responsibilities in a society, it is closely linked to citizenship.
 Participation is all activities (local and national) that are intended to
 influence public decision making and the allocation of resources (Chazan
 1982).2 Participation includes voting, lobbying, and activities at the local
 level. Involvement in women's groups or village organizations, for example,
 can shape decisions that distribute resources, whether those are develop-
 ment funds or patronage (Hirshmann 1991).

 Theoretical Understandings of Citizenship and Participation

 This work builds on the scholarship of Stephen Ndegwa (1997), who uses
 the Kenyan case to illustrate that citizenship can be understood from both
 liberal and communal (civic-republican) perspectives. Liberal views of citi-
 zenship concentrate on the rights of the individual in the common society.
 The notion of liberal citizenship captures the idea that people view them-
 selves as part of a larger political entity, which grants them equal access to
 political, social, and civil rights. These individuals express their citizen-
 ship through participatory acts that enhance their rights (Marshall 1964:
 78). Communal interpretations of citizenship focus on an individual's re-
 sponsibility to the society (Miller 1995). This viewpoint argues that citi-
 zens see themselves as part of a shared community (Stewart 1995), which
 may not be rooted in the nation-state but in subnational ascriptive or non-
 ascriptive identities (Turner 1993: 12-15). The communal interpretation
 maintains that individuals participate because they feel a responsibility to
 the society and want it to achieve common goals (Oldfield 1990). In this
 article, I assume that citizenship has both liberal and communal attributes.
 I also maintain that perceptions of citizenship rights and responsi-
 bilities are dynamic. This work illustrates that citizenship may change
 because of the ways that decisions are made within a community. David
 Miller (1995) asserts that if political decision making is inclusive, incorpo-
 rates compromise and consensus building, and values the ideas of all par-
 ticipants, individuals may feel that their rights as members of the com-
 munity have been acknowledged, and they may continue to meet their
 obligations to the common society. On the other hand, power inequalities
 in society and institutional structures may constrain discourse and politi-

This content downloaded from 128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 22:01:04 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 P 0-I-

 0 0

 m

 -4
 :-

 U,
 0
 z

 cal involvement. Political institutions may be designed in such a way that
 they exclude the involvement of most individuals (Knight 1992: 19), while
 decisions made through public discussion may simply equal the ideas and
 desires of those who dominate society (Bachrach and Baratz 1962). I argue
 that these exclusive decision-making institutions may cause people to
 redefine their relationship with the community, and possibly to renege on
 their obligations. The cases below illustrate how institutional arrangements
 that involve state actors are one cause of inequality in decision making.
 State policies and the ties local elites have to state officials can transform
 the community context and the ways rights and obligations are viewed
 within that context.

 The rights and responsibilities that people feel in a community may

 also be transformed when the community cannot meet its material obliga-
 tions to its members. In The Politics, Aristotle defines the citizen as an
 individual who is responsible to the community and carries out a duty to
 work toward the common good of the society (Aristotle 1982: 107-108).
 But it is not only that people are obligated to participate for the sake of
 the common society; society is also expected to give something back to
 individuals. People gain a sense of belonging when they meet their obliga-
 tions to society (Rousseau 1968: 59-64), but more importantly, they often
 receive material benefits from the community (Oldfield 1990). There is a
 social contract which allows individuals to rely on each other to achieve
 shared goals, to have confidence that their contributions will be recipro-
 cated and that they will have the right to access benefits (Ndegwa 1997;
 Hyden 1980: 18-19). The social contract and the right to rewards for all
 participants encourage individuals to meet their obligations in the com-
 munity.

 This article illustrates that the social contract may weaken if the

 community cannot provide the benefits that its members want, or if some
 individuals are refused the right to access group resources. People may ques-
 tion their responsibilities in a community that can no longer provide for
 them, or denies them the rewards of participation. There are numerous
 causes for such changes, but the findings below illustrate that macroeco-
 nomic stresses and institutional arrangements that promote unequal deci-
 sion making particularly affect the ability of the community to meet its
 obligations to citizens. These forces may be external to the community,
 yet they may cause individuals to re-evaluate their responsibility to the
 common society.

 The following empirical studies enhance our understanding of citi-

 zenship by illustrating the dynamic nature of rights and responsibilities in
 three particular communities. The cases demonstrate, first, that the power
 relations and institutional structures of decision making can negate citi-
 zen obligations, and, second, that an ever-evolving social contract can shape
 individual views of citizenship. The first two cases demonstrate both of
 these aspects of citizenship and participation. The cases are from the local
 organizations of the water pump (forage) committee and the women's pro-

This content downloaded from 128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 22:01:04 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 P

 0

 ON

 -4

 I
 m

 z

 C'

 z

 -4
 c

 m m
 0

 n
 C'
 -

 m
 z

 I
 LA

 z

 D

 -4

 C')

 -o

 -4
 0
 z

 motion group (groupement de promotion feminine-GPF) in the village of
 Ndoulo (population 1,700). Data comes from interviews with Ndoulo resi-
 dents and group members, as well as observations of decision-making pro-
 cesses in these associations.

 The third case expands the scope of study beyond the village level to
 examine Senegal's Mouride Islamic organization (tariqa).3 I use the second-
 ary literature on the Mourides to illustrate the dynamic nature of citizen-
 ship in the tariqa. To shed further light on this issue, I utilize interviews
 with Mourides in Patar, a community of 600. Because of the constraints of
 data, the third case does not examine how decision-making institutions
 among the Mourides influence citizenship. Rather, it focuses on how the
 nature of citizen rights and responsibilities implied by the social contract
 changes over time. All interviews and observations used in this work were
 conducted in 1994 and 1995.4

 Both Ndoulo and Patar are located in the Diourbel region, which is a

 primary area for cultivation of Senegal's main cash crop, peanuts. Both vil-
 lages are located on a national highway, which gives inhabitants some ac-
 cess to urban areas, and both have been somewhat incorporated into the
 capitalist economy through cash crop production, urban migration, and
 weekly markets. The responses and situations outlined in this work pro-
 vide an in-depth examination of the nature of citizen rights and responsi-
 bilities in two rural Senegalese communities.

 Case #1: The Ndoulo Community Forage and Forage Committee

 The first case study illustrates how power inequalities in society shape
 decision making and structural factors, which affects the ability of the com-
 munity to uphold its end of the social contract and may lead to transforma-
 tions in individuals' ideas about obligations to the common society. The
 Ndoulo forage is a diesel-powered pump and series of pipelines and faucets
 that provide water to the village. Since wells in Ndoulo are in disrepair,
 the forage serves as the only village water source. Every two years, Ndoulo
 residents elect a committee of twelve individuals to manage the forage.
 The committee collects monthly water fees from Ndoulo inhabitants, pays
 expenses for labor and fuel, balances the monthly accounts, and meets bi-
 annually with villagers to report on the status of the forage. Villagers may
 also attend and participate in monthly forage committee meetings.

 The Ndoulo forage shows how decision-making processes that ignore
 community members' rights to participate may cause individuals to re-
 evaluate their obligations to communal groups. Exclusive decision making
 is often rooted in power inequalities in society. In Ndoulo, the highest sta-
 tus villagers served on the forage committee-the village chief, his wife,
 his nephew, four Ndoulo merchants, one large landowner, two school teach-
 ers, and two village elders. Many villagers depended on these wealthy com-
 mittee members, whose patronage helped residents to survive during

This content downloaded from 128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 22:01:04 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 difficult times. They loaned farmers peanut seeds for cultivation or food
 during the hungry season, and they gave the largest donations at funerals
 and baptisms (Male villager, 5 March 1995; Female villager, 14 February
 1995). Though class consciousness and class organization are generally
 underdeveloped in Senegal (Fatton 1988),5 poor Ndoulo residents were in-
 tensely aware of income differences between themselves and the commit-
 tee members. One man said, "There are five or six families in Ndoulo [all
 of whom serve on the forage committee] which have everything-a big
 house, a television, electricity-while the rest of us cannot afford food for
 three meals a day" (Male villager, 21 June 1995).

 C)

 0

 -o

 0

 z

 The high status of the committee members and their role as village
 patrons were key reasons for their election. Social norms in rural Senegal
 stipulate that village elites hold positions of power (Male villager, 17 Feb-
 ruary 1995). Yet, as one woman explained, there was a social contract be-
 tween the committee members and the residents; the committee had an
 obligation to adequately manage the water resources, and the villagers had
 an obligation to adhere to the decisions the committee made. Until re-
 cently, residents felt committee members had met their responsibilities,
 and villagers had re-elected them repeatedly since the mid-1980s (Female
 villager, 30 January 1995).

 In some cases, state actors may also cause inequalities in communal

 decision making. Outside agents-and the resources they bring to the com-
 munity and its members-can shape how individuals view their obligation
 to the social contract. This was true of the Ndoulo forage committee, in
 which members had ties to state officials.6 State officials and committee
 members provided one another with assistance and political support (Male
 villager, 18 March 1995; Gyimah-Boadi 1994), and committee members often
 worked closely with state officials to get forage parts or technical assis-
 tance. The majority of committee members were also involved in the rul-
 ing Socialist Party (Parti Socialiste-PS), and the Ndoulo arrondissement
 PS leader served on the committee. These alignments strengthened the
 committee's power because villagers did not want to isolate themselves
 from state or party resources.

 A meeting held in Ndoulo in March 1995 provides an example of how

 power inequalities and the involvement of external actors may influence
 decision-making processes and cause people to re-assess their communal
 obligations.7 To better contextualize the meeting, it is necessary to provide
 some background information on the condition of the forage. Between March
 1994 and August 1995, the forage faced several problems. Fuel prices had
 increased because of Senegal's 50 percent devaluation of the Communaute
 Financiere Africaine (CFA) currency in February 1994, and this fact made
 it difficult to balance the monthly accounts. The forage had broken down
 several times, and replacement parts (which were imported) had become
 more expensive (Male forage committee member, 29 January 1995). During
 February 1995, the forage did not function for eighteen days because the
 committee did not have enough money to buy needed fuel. The dire situa-

This content downloaded from 128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 22:01:04 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 r

 -I

 -4
 I
 00

 z
 00

 --I
 z
 4

 m
 z =

 -u
 I

 m

 z
 -q

 ~0

 N

 -4

 -4

 z

 tion made Ndoulo residents angry with the committee and its manage-
 ment of the forage (Female villager, 14 February 1995; Male villager, 19
 February, 1995).

 One month after the forage broke down, the Ndoulo forage commit-

 tee proposed an increase in the amount residents paid monthly for water in
 order to overcome some of these financial problems. Distrustful of the com-
 mittee, Ndoulo inhabitants who came to the March 1995 meeting hoped to
 elect a new committee, since the officers had almost completed their two-
 year term (Male forage committee member, 13 March 1995; Male villager,
 18 March 1995; Male villager, 31 March 1995). The sous-prefet, who was
 not a member of the committee and did not attend monthly committee
 meetings, moderated the meeting and set the agenda. The chef du CER and
 an official from the Diourbel Water Department also attended. These
 officials explained the budgetary problems of the forage, and on behalf of
 the committee, proposed an increase in the rate of payments. Their support
 for the price increase made it apparent that there would be no opportunity
 to bring up other issues at the meeting. Villagers could not propose that a
 new committee be elected, since the suggestion would have countered the
 authority of these officials. One interviewee pointed out that because the
 sous-prefet, chef du CER, and the Water Department official allocate re-
 sources to villagers and make crucial decisions, no one wanted to challenge
 them (Male villager, 18 March 1995).

 After three hours of debate, the state officials went to the sous-prefet's

 office for lunch. A younger man from a poorer family, which had been some-
 what ostracized in Ndoulo because of its members' outspokenness, then
 raised the issue that many villagers wanted to discuss-election of a new
 committee. A small contingent of young, educated men used this opportu-
 nity to argue in favor of the proposal, though, for the most part, the com-
 mittee ignored them. In an apparent attempt to stall for time, committee
 members took turns standing on their chairs to speak in favor of raising the
 price of dues. Although those in the audience tried to speak in favor of
 elections, many of their most vocal advocates had left the meeting earlier
 when they realized the committee and state officials would control the
 agenda. The decision-making process ignored the rights of villagers to con-
 tribute their ideas.

 When the state officials returned, they promptly announced that there

 would be no elections for a new committee. They did not take time to
 consider the reasons to hold elections, though they were probably aware of
 the widespread distrust of the committee. Instead, the officials and the com-
 mittee suggested that everyone agree to form a redressment committee to
 oversee the work of the regular committee, audit financial records, and
 suggest what, if any, price increase was appropriate. Since those who wanted
 to hold elections had been ignored and were powerless to challenge the
 officials, they had little choice but to agree with the proposal.8 They sug-
 gested the names of two younger, educated men and one educated woman
 to be on the redressment committee. The committee rejected the woman,

This content downloaded from 128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 22:01:04 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 p;
 C)

 -I

 0

 e0

 m
 H

 0
 z

 chose an older man (who was a relative of one of the committee members),
 and adjourned the meeting.9

 Community patrons and state officials ignored the rights of members
 of the community to participate in dialogue and decision making. One vil-
 lager talked about how, because of power inequalities in the village, those
 of little status acquiesced to the decision, even though their right to be a
 part of that decision had been dismissed. Most people felt they could not
 contradict the decisions of village patrons and state officials (Female vil-
 lager, 26 May 1995). One man replied after the meeting, "The sous-prefet
 and guy from the Water Department protected the committee, instead of
 letting us elect a new committee. The decision was not one that all agreed
 with, but what could we do? Argue with the sous-prefet?" (Male villager,
 18 March 1995). This statement shows that villagers felt they should have
 had a role in group decisions. The forage situation presents a crucial les-
 son. State administrators, who are not elected by community members and
 are not obligated to the community's social contract, may ignore the rights
 and responsibilities of individuals.

 In one sense, the redressment committee was a compromise and could
 have provided dissatisfied Ndoulo villagers a means by which to oversee
 the committee and be represented in decision making. The committee could
 have been a means to recognize the rights and responsibilities of individu-
 als. However, the redressment committee was not allowed to play its in-
 tended role.'0 In subsequent monthly meetings of the redressment and for-
 age committees (which government officials did not attend), the forage
 committee controlled the agenda, did not let the redressment committee
 members speak or have access to the financial records of the forage, and
 ignored their questions about the forage spending patterns (Female forage
 committee member, 6 June 1995; Male villager, 6 May 1995). After two of
 the three redressment committee members missed meetings in April and
 May because they were not informed about them, they said their right to
 represent the other villagers was not being taken seriously by the commit-
 tee (Male redressment committee member, 20 May 1995).

 The villagers had little recourse when it became apparent that the

 redressment committee could not play its watchdog role. While some resi-
 dents complained to committee members, most knew that if they wanted
 changes, they would have to win the support of state officials. However, it
 appeared that most villagers would not risk telling the sous-prefet or chef
 du CER that the redressment committee was not working, since villagers
 did not want the officials to think they were trouble-makers (Male redress-
 ment committee member, 6 May 1995). Because of power imbalances in
 the decision-making processes of this group, and because of the involve-
 ment of state officials in this association, the rights of individuals to par-
 ticipate were ignored. Individuals then questioned their obligations to the
 community. Many villagers began to disengage from the social contract
 and quit attending meetings. Only 100 of the estimated 600 Ndoulo adult
 inhabitants attended the March 1995 meeting, and most of these individu-

This content downloaded from 128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 22:01:04 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 I-.

 -I
 0

 0

 -H

 z

 -4

 -4

 N

 z

 I

 -Q

 z

 :c

 -H

 zo

 als were men.'1 The Ndoulo forage situation illustrates that when the rights
 of individuals are disregarded, those individuals may begin to question their
 responsibilities to the common society.

 Another reason people may re-assess their obligations to a society is
 if they no longer feel they benefit from its social contract. Such a change
 occurred in Ndoulo. From the mid-1980s when it was built until 1994, the
 forage had functioned smoothly. It rarely broke down, and people gave their
 monthly payments (Male villager, 31 January 1995; Female villager, 23
 March 1995). By 1994, things had changed. Water shortages happened often
 and the committee had increased the price three times between February
 1994 and January 1995 (Male forage committee member, 29 January 1995).12
 Since the public good of water was less certain, people questioned why
 they needed to responsibly participate. One man said, "People in Ndoulo
 don't come to meetings or pay their dues because they are upset and dis-
 gusted with the forage. Since it often does not work, they figure, 'Why
 bother?"' (Male villager, 18 May 1995) Almost sixty households did not
 pay their monthly dues, which amounted to approximately 20 percent of
 the money needed to run the forage (Male forage committee member, 18
 May 1995). While it may have been purposeful and political, villagers' non-
 participation (in the form of nonpayment) was not in the interest of the
 village as a whole. Indeed, the financial problems of the forage were exacer-
 bated because so many people did not pay.

 The forage case provides one illustration of how individuals may re-
 act when they feel the community has ignored their rights to participate
 and refused to meet its material obligations to its members. In some cases,
 and particularly this one, citizens may question their responsibilities to
 the community. They may refuse to uphold their end of the social contract
 if they perceive that the community is not upholding its end. They may do
 this in spite of the fact that their participation would benefit the larger
 group.

 The Ndoulo forage shows how external variables beyond the control
 of a community may influence ideas about rights to participate and respon-
 sibilities to meet obligations. While not always the case, these factors may
 transform reciprocal communal obligations and the social contract. In the
 forage, the elite decision makers who ignored people's opinions made indi-
 viduals feel that they had no right to be a part of the process. The reason
 these decision-making institutions were exclusive, though, was because of
 the involvement of state officials. Though state officials did not make deci-
 sions about the forage, their implicit support for committee members meant
 that individuals would not aggressively challenge the committee. Villagers
 might privately complain to committee members, or those of higher edu-
 cation levels might ask questions at meetings, but most Ndoulo residents
 did nothing. The overall institutional nature of the committee and its
 cooptation by the state made participation more difficult and helped to
 corrode the social contract within the community.

 However, the exclusive decision-making processes in the group were

This content downloaded from 128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 22:01:04 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 -i

 0 p-
 0

 -H

 m

 m

 z

 not new. It was just that before 1994 the villagers had been more willing to
 ignore them, because residents were still getting water. While elitist, the
 committee had a certain level of legitimacy as long as it was effective. It
 was only after a structural change-the 1994 devaluation of the CFA cur-
 rency-made it more difficult for the committee to provide water (and for
 villagers to pay for it) that people began to question their responsibilities to
 a community that could not meet its obligations. Even though devaluation
 was beyond the control of the committee, and even though some villagers
 did not really understand why devaluation put such a financial strain on
 the forage (Male forage committee member, 6 May 1995), this economic
 change caused residents to re-examine their responsibilities to a commit-
 tee that was not fulfilling its obligations. Devaluation highlighted prob-
 lems of decision making and participation which had previously been ig-
 nored, and contributed to the transformation of the social contract in
 Ndoulo. In this case, institutional and macroeconomic factors outside the
 realm of the community affected how individuals saw their rights and re-
 sponsibilities inside the community.

 Case #2: The Ndoulo GPF

 The case of the Ndoulo GPF provides another example of how the ways
 that people view their rights and responsibilities in a community may
 change. The Ndoulo GPF is a group of eighty women of different ages, class
 levels, and traditional status backgrounds. The group formed in the late
 1970s, and a decade later it paid 22,000 CFA to gain official state recogni-
 tion as a GPF (GPF president, 7 December 1994).13 GPF status enables wom-
 en's associations to obtain bank loans, to be eligible for development pro-
 jects sponsored by non-governmental organizations (NGOs), and to have
 access to assistance from state officials (Monitrice, 19 March 1995).14 While
 not all women's groups in Senegal have registered with the state because of
 the expense and their suspicion of state officials, the number of GPFs in
 rural areas has risen dramatically since 1985 (Niang 1991).

 Rural women in Senegal depend greatly on women's organizations
 such as the Ndoulo GPF. Because of the decline of agricultural productivity
 in Senegal's peanut-producing areas (Lewis 1987: 291-300), male heads of
 households earn only enough money through agriculture to feed their fami-
 lies for half of the year (Male villager, 1 March 1995). Men often migrate to
 urban areas, leaving their wives in an uncertain financial situation. To
 supplement transfer payments from their husbands, women rely on mu-
 tual support networks and income-generating opportunities (Female vil-
 lager, 4 February 1995). Women's associations help their members obtain
 credit, gain literacy or numeracy skills, share workloads, and overcome
 other constraints that hinder women's involvement in the economy
 (Patterson 1996: 193-225; Teague 1991; Nelson 1981).

 Ideally, women's associations can build on women's solidarity and

This content downloaded from 128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 22:01:04 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 p C)

 -I

 m

 n

 z

 m

 0

 z
 7
 n

 z

 -I

 0
 z
 Ln

 :>

 -0

 experiences to help them achieve shared goals (Mwaniki 1986). But com-
 mon experiences do not necessarily mean that people will feel shared re-
 sponsibilities to participate for larger goods. I argue that if decision-making
 processes do not reflect the rights of individuals to participate in discus-
 sion and compromise, people may question their obligations to the com-
 munity. Such was the case in the Ndoulo GPF, in which power imbalances
 that developed after the group became a GPF changed the nature of deci-
 sion making. In early 1990, the Ndoulo GPF president was elected to be the
 president of the Diourbel departement women's federation, which consists
 of more than 200 village-level GPFs.'5 This position enabled her to interact
 regularly with party politicians and the sous-prefet, monitrice, and chef du
 CER, and to have access to state patronage and political support. State
 officials helped the president maintain power by refusing to let the mem-
 bers elect a new president or form another GPF (GPF member, 10 Decem-
 ber 1994).16

 The exclusive decision-making processes of the group were reflected

 in the fact that the GPF rarely had meetings (GPF member, 23 March 1995).
 The treasurer explained that the president and state officials often made
 decisions without any input from members, and sometimes without the
 advice of other GPF officers (GPF treasurer, 25 March 1995). In the one
 meeting the group held while this research was conducted, the leaders ig-
 nored the rights of participants to be involved in decision making.'7 On 19
 May 1995, GPF members met with an official of the World Bank, the sous-
 prefet, and the monitrice to discuss a new World Bank program to encour-
 age girls' education. In order to get project funding, the Ndoulo village
 women needed to sign up at least twenty girls to begin school in Fall 1995.
 The agenda of the meeting was not to discuss or debate the program, but to
 instruct the women to collect as many names of eligible girls as they could.
 The president and government officials presented the ideas, told the women
 the deadline for the project, and then adjourned the meeting.

 While it was highly probable that GPF members did not oppose the
 project that the president and officials proposed, the larger issue is that the
 meeting was not a free forum for discussion of different points of view. The
 president and state officials controlled the agenda and provided no oppor-
 tunities for questions; the president did not take advantage of the opportu-
 nity to discuss any other projects in which the GPF was involved (GPF
 member, 22 May 1995; GPF member, 26 May 1995). One member pointed
 out that the women did not feel they could speak against the program be-
 cause they did not want to challenge the authority of the sous-prefet and
 monitrice, on whom they may depend for future favorable treatment (GPF
 member, 22 May 1995). Three interviewees said the women felt they had
 little recourse against the president because of her support from state officials
 (GPF member, 22 May 1995; GPF member, 19 December 1994; GPF mem-
 ber, 26 March 1995).

 The women reacted to the inequality in decision making by re-evalu-
 ating their obligations to the group. One woman pointed out that she did

This content downloaded from 128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 22:01:04 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 not see the use in attending meetings anymore, since the president would
 just make all the decisions; what the women said really did not matter
 (GPF member, 10 December 1994). Another member said that because the
 GPF rarely had meetings, she did not feel any responsibilities to the group
 (GPF member, 23 March 1995). The attitudes of these women provide an
 example of how individuals whose rights to participate are ignored may
 begin to question their role in the community.

 It may also be the case that when a community cannot (or will not)
 meet its obligations to the social contract, its members may be likely to
 refuse to meet their obligations. In the case of the forage, we saw that the
 community could not meet its obligations because of the financial prob-
 lems that followed the devaluation of the CFA currency; structural factors
 constrained the association. This was not the case in the Ndoulo GPF.
 Rather, the president had gradually denied women's access to group benefits.
 In previous years, the women had shared the rewards of the group; by 1995,
 the situation had changed.

 -I
 0

 0

 w

 In the association's first fifteen years, the women had successfully
 completed many projects (GPF president, 7 December 1994; GPF member,
 19 December 1994). For example, ten years earlier, the members planted,
 watered, and protected a woodlot of tree seedlings. After five years, the
 trees were large enough to harvest and were sold for a profit. Part of the
 money was reinvested into a millet seed storage program, through which
 the GPF bought seeds at a low price at harvest time, stored them, and re-
 sold them for a higher price before the planting season. The rest of the
 profits from the harvest were given to GPF members. While the amount
 was only 1,500 CFA per individual, the money did allow some women to
 pay for needed food or purchase items to be sold in the market (GPF mem-
 ber, 20 March 1995; GPF member, 26 May 1995).18

 0

 --

 o

 Things began to change, though, as the president built ties to state

 officials. Two statements from interviewees illustrate how the community
 gradually denied the rights of individuals to access its resources. One woman
 said, "The government of America brought the GPF sewing machines, scis-
 sors, cloth, and supplies and the monitrice began to teach us how to be
 tailors. Soon, though, the supplies disappeared and the project ended. The
 president took everything and sold it and she and the monitrice kept the
 money. We got nothing out of it-even though it was supposed to be for all
 of us" (GPF member, 26 May 1995).

 Another member explained the transformation of the group,

 When we started this group, everyone was the same. The
 president was just one of us and we trusted her. We all had
 similar problems, and the group was intended to help everyone
 out. We wanted projects to bring money, a group that could
 offer loans, a network of support for baptisms and funerals.
 But things changed. Over time, [the president] built a new
 house of concrete, got a television, electricity, and even a

This content downloaded from 128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 22:01:04 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 -A.

 pO
 -I

 0

 a

 m

 z

 z

 --A
 c
 m m
 0

 n

 r)
 IN
 m
 z

 I
 LA -o

 z

 -o
 n

 -0
 -o
 0
 z

 water faucet extension to her compound. She put on her nice
 clothing, her fancy shoes, her jewelry of gold, and she acted
 like she was better than us. All the while, it appeared that
 the group's money was decreasing. All the money from our
 peanut field, our cattle project, our dues.... When we told
 the chef du CER, he said that we were just jealous of her
 husband's good fortunes in business (GPF member, 16
 February 1995).

 While these rumors of corruption were impossible to verify, the truth-

 fulness of these allegations is less important than the fact that most mem-
 bers believed them to be true. The perception among members of corrup-
 tion made many women question why they should contribute to the group,
 if they were not gaining anything from it (GPF member, 29 March 1995;
 GPF member, 10 December 1994). Their right to access benefits, as well as
 to participate in group decisions, was gone. The statements by interviewees
 indicate that the expectations that citizens have of one another may change
 because of new opportunities that some individuals in the community have.
 Ties to state officials may be one way that some individuals gain those
 opportunities for external resources and support.

 The GPF provides an illustration of how the mutability of a com-
 munity's social contract may cause individuals to re-evaluate their obliga-
 tions to that community. Most women in the GPF chose not to be involved
 in the group. Of the eighty members, only fifteen attended the May 1995
 meeting. Most GPF members also did not help on group projects. For ex-
 ample, the GPF planted a peanut field in 1994 to make money, but less
 than ten women helped with the harvest (Monitrice, 19 March 1995; GPF
 president, Ndoulo, 12 March 1995). One member concluded, "Since I get
 nothing from the group, why would I stay in the GPF?" (GPF member, 12
 December 1994).

 While nonparticipation was a deliberate act by most GPF members,
 it was not organized to achieve a collective good. Abstention such as that
 by GPF members may express individuals' disgust with their community
 and the changed nature of obligations within it, but it cannot easily enable
 individuals to build new communities that value their input and have new
 definitions of social obligations. In the GPF, abstention did not enable the
 women to challenge the president or, more importantly, to start effective
 associations (other than GPFs) to achieve communal goals.

 Communal obligations built on gender solidarity had changed in the
 GPF. Unlike the case of the forage, it was not that macroeconomic forces
 had transformed the members' loyalties and involvement in the GPF. Rather,
 institutional factors that reflected the overall nature of GPF arrangements
 in Senegal had affected the social contract. Because the GPF was affiliated
 with the state, group members gradually lost control of the organization
 and its benefits. As the president slowly gained closer ties to state actors,
 she no longer needed to pay attention to the input of the members or to

This content downloaded from 128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 22:01:04 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 p

 1-

 0 V

 a
 z0

 -4
 -o

 share group benefits with them. By 1995, members questioned their re-
 sponsibility to a community which once had valued their opinions, shared
 group resources with them, and helped them to achieve needed public goods,
 but which now ignored their involvement and could not meet their expec-
 tations. The GPF provides evidence that state influences, which are out-
 side the control of community members, may shape how individuals view
 their rights in the community and their obligations to the social contract.

 Case #3: Mouride Religious Adherents in Senegal (and Patar)

 The above cases provide illustrations of how transformations of the
 social contract may affect how individuals define their rights and obliga-
 tions in local settings. This section builds on previous scholarship about
 Senegal's Mouride religious community and interviews with Patar Mourides
 to shed further light on this issue.'9 While this case study moves beyond a
 local-level analysis, it continues the earlier investigation of the ways that
 citizens' views of community rights and responsibilities may change. I il-
 lustrate that in the last decade many Mourides have quit viewing their
 vote choice in national elections as an obligatory act by which the religious
 community and its leaders can obtain public goods. This change in percep-
 tion and participation is rooted in the decline of material reciprocity be-
 tween the state and the Mouride community. To understand this transfor-
 mation, and the structural factors that have led to it, it is necessary to first
 examine Mouridism in Senegal.

 Mouridism is based on the life and experiences of its founder, Shaykh
 Amadou Bamba Mbacke (1850-1927). Amadou Bamba was an ascetic man
 who exhorted his followers to pray, fast, seek instruction, devote them-
 selves to a religious leader (marabout),20 and work for the marabout (Cruise
 O'Brien 1970; Cruise O'Brien 1971). Mouridism gained supporters as the
 French colonialists attacked indigenous Wolof ethnic society in the late
 1800s. To encourage peanut cultivation, the French gave the marabouts
 large tracts of land and economic resources, which the religious leaders
 shared with their disciples in return for labor and devotion (Coulon 1976;
 Cruise O'Brien 1970: 160-162; Cruise O'Brien 1971: 163-187; Klein 1968:
 221-229; Trimingham 1962: 177). Because of this clientelist relationship,
 Mouride leaders have been criticized for exploiting their followers and con-
 trolling their disciples' actions (Cruise O'Brien 1979: 215; Fatton 1986;
 Markovitz 1970).

 Senegalese politicians have often relied on the marabouts to deliver
 the votes of their followers. Since pre-independence elections, the marabouts
 have mobilized rural peasants through commands (ndigals), which are giv-
 en over the radio or in person; the most prominent and influential of these
 ndigals come from the xalifa-general. A reciprocal understanding appeared
 to exist between the Mourides and Senegal's first president Leopold Sedar
 Senghor of the PS.21 Senghor instituted rural development programs to bol-

This content downloaded from 128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 22:01:04 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 .
 -I
 p0
 0

 H

 a

 m

 z

 z

 H

 c

 N
 m

 0
 V')

 m
 z

 -v

 0
 z

 z

 ster peanut production, implemented favorable peanut prices, and provided
 the marabouts and their followers with free farming implements (Creevey
 1985; Morgenthau 1964: 149). There was an implicit social contract be-
 tween the Mouride community and the state-the state provided benefits
 to these religious leaders and their rural followers and, in return, the
 Mourides supported the state (Coulon and Cruise O'Brien 1989: 149-150).
 For Mouride community members, a vote for the PS was a vote for a larger
 public good and reflected one's obligation to the religious group. Mouride
 citizens felt a responsibility to participate in order to benefit the commu-
 nity, had a right to access group benefits, and received rewards for their
 involvement.

 It is essential to emphasize, though, that Mouride disciples have never

 unconditionally followed their marabouts, despite their close relations with
 the holy men (Behrman 1970: 61 ).22 The relationship has always been con-
 ditional on the community's ability to meet its obligations to its members.
 Leonardo Villal6n (1995: 121) writes, "There is no denying that, taken as a
 whole, marabouts in Senegal exert a great deal of influence over their fol-
 lowers.... Yet the extent of that influence varies significantly from one
 context to another and indeed, from one individual to another." Donal B.
 Cruise O'Brien (1971: 5) further explains that the willingness of disciples
 to uphold their end of the social contract (and follow ndigals) is related to
 the ability of the religious community (and its leaders) to meet its obliga-
 tion of access to state resources. "They [followers] may seek spiritual com-
 fort in the assurance of salvation [from the marabout], and a sense of iden-
 tity in the Mouride community, but they also demand material security
 and political protection from the organization to which they give so com-
 plete an allegiance."

 On the aggregate, Mourides are probably more willing than not to
 consider the opinions of their marabouts, but this level of influence de-
 pends on how well the social contract between the members and the com-
 munity is met. In the last decade, macroeconomic forces have made it more
 difficult for the marabouts to guarantee that the political participation of
 their followers will lead to communal goods. After a period of drought in
 the 1970s contributed to a 50 percent decrease in Senegal's peanut exports
 and an increase in the country's international debt, Senegal was forced in
 1980 to institute structural adjustment policies (SAPs). Adjustments have
 included cuts in spending on health care and education, an end to subsidies
 for fertilizers, seeds, and agricultural credit, and privatization of the trade
 and marketing of peanuts (Ka and van de Walle 1992). Because of these
 SAPs, the state has been unable to guarantee the same level of patronage to
 the marabouts and their followers.23 This situation illustrates that the re-
 sources on which the social contract in a community is built may be out-
 side the control of the community; external factors may influence how
 well the common society can meet its obligations.

 The decline of national policies that benefited the Mouride rural com-

 munity has damaged the social contract. It is not that members' rights to

This content downloaded from 128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 22:01:04 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 access group resources have been dismissed (as was the case in the Ndoulo
 GPF), but that resources themselves have drastically decreased. In fact, ru-
 ral Mourides determined that their votes for the PS no longer would lead to
 public goods for the community long before their marabouts did. By 1988,
 many voters had realized that the state could not meet their expectations
 and provide the same level of patronage as it had in the past. During the
 contentious presidential campaign of 1988 between President Abdou Diouf
 of the PS and Abdoulaye Wade of the Senegalese Democratic Party (Parti
 Democratique Senegalais-PDS), the Mouride xalifa-general issued an
 ndigal to vote for President Diouf. Cruise O'Brien explains that the PDS
 slogan of sopi (change) captivated many voters throughout Senegal. With-
 out any formal organizing, Mouride voters began to gradually define ndigals
 in two ways-the ndigal of politics which could be ignored and the ndigal
 of religion which should be followed. This fact shows how under some
 conditions individuals may begin to re-interpret their responsibilities to a
 community in light of changed material conditions. By 1993, Mouride na-
 tional leaders realized that to maintain the allegiance of their followers,
 they should not make a public statement in support of the PS in the presi-
 dential election (Cruise O'Brien 1993).

 C) P

 0

 -v
 -I
 H

 m -0

 z

 In the case of the Mourides, the benefits of the social contract did not
 fully disappear before people began to re-evaluate their obligations. It may
 be that in some circumstances only a relative, not absolute, decline in com-
 munal resources may influence how individuals see their responsibilities.
 In Senegal, the state does not have the same level of resources as it did in
 the past, but not all patronage is gone. State officials and local PS bosses
 continue to distribute some resources to rural citizens, but these are differ-
 ent from the favorable national-level policies of the past. Today, political
 patronage consists of sacks of rice, cloth with the candidate's picture on it,
 or access to small-scale development funds. Because national-level patron-
 age has decreased, these local-level resources have increased in importance,
 a fact which has caused local marabouts to become more involved in elec-
 toral politics. Ndigals from local marabouts have begun to replace those of
 national marabouts. In 1993, several marabouts in the Diourbel region
 encouraged their followers to vote for the PS, while some even issued ndigals
 for Abdoulaye Wade. As was the case with the ndigal from the xalifa-gen-
 eral in 1988, the 1993 maraboutic appeals had little influence on vote choice
 among Mourides (Beck 1995). Mourides have become less obligated to the
 community, not because communal benefits do not exist, but because they
 have decreased.

 The decline in Mouride support for the PS has not been so drastic
 that the party has lost control of government. Certainly not all Mourides
 have quit voting for the PS or refused to listen to the ndigals of their
 marabouts; many still honor their responsibilities to the community and
 feel that the state is meeting its obligations. But there are enough Mourides
 whose views of group obligations have been transformed that we can begin
 to speculate about their impact on politics. National elections have be-

This content downloaded from 128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 22:01:04 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 pa C),t
 P-I

 0

 00
 :>

 a
 m

 z

 z

 m

 m

 0

 n

 z

 I

 0
 z

 z

 -v

 H

 come more competitive in the last decade, in part because Mourides have
 abstained in higher rates or have voted for opposition parties. This fact can
 be seen in the gradual decline in PS support and voter turnout rates in
 Senegal. In 1988, the PS won 73.2 percent of the vote, but by 1993 the
 party's support had slipped to 58.4 percent (Villalon 1994a). National voter
 turnout rates have decreased from 64 percent in 1978, to 58 percent in 1988,
 to 51 percent in 1993 (Savane 1995; Villal6n 1994a). The greatest decline
 in voter turnout has been in departements of the Diourbel region. In
 1993, voter abstention in the Mouride-dominated Mbacke departement
 (where Touba is located) dropped to 28 percent from 67 percent in 1988.24
 The Bambey departement, which is also in the Diourbel region and heavily
 Mouride, had the second lowest turnout rate in the nation with 37 percent
 (Savane 1995). These high abstention rates indicate that some Mourides
 have ignored the vote suggestions of their marabouts and re-evaluated their
 obligations to the community (Cruise O'Brien 1983; Savane 1995). The trans-
 formation of the role of Mourides in national elections provides one ex-
 ample of how changed views of responsibilities to the community may
 affect participation, even if that participation might continue to benefit
 the society.

 The voting behavior and political attitudes of Patar residents reaffirm

 the changes in obligations to participate among Mourides. The majority of
 Patar inhabitants have been encouraged by their marabout to vote for presi-
 dential and legislative candidates from the PS (Male villager, 23 June 1995).
 In the past, the community was rewarded for its political support with state
 patronage-a new school building, a forage, a peanut storage building, and
 access to numerous projects funded by international donors (Male villager,
 6 April 1995). The willingness of Patar villagers to follow their marabout
 and vote for the ruling party was predicated on the expectation that the
 community would benefit materially if villagers voted for the PS. Voting
 for the PS was seen as a responsibility of villagers, an act that would bring
 public goods to the community (Male villager, 23 June 1995; Male villager,
 12 May 1995; Male villager, 5 June 1995).

 Though in the 1990s Patar received less patronage support than in

 the past, the village was sporadically given state resources because of the
 marabout's lobbying. For example, in 1992 the marabout had intervened
 with officials at the Diourbel Water Department to get a needed part to fix
 the village forage (Male forage committee president, 4 July 1995). Even
 though there were benefits to gain, albeit on a smaller scale than in the
 past, some Patar citizens began to question their participation to achieve
 these communal goods. One man said, "It no longer matters whom we vote
 for.... Why throw away your vote on some suggestion by the marabout in
 return for nothing?" (Male villager, 13 April 1995). Another resident said,
 "Voting is just a waste of time.... Politicians say they will bring you
 something-rice for your family, a project for the village-but they never
 do.... If they do, they bring so little" (Female villager, 11 April 1995).
 These responses show that even if individuals have the right to access com-

This content downloaded from 128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 22:01:04 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 0 -v
 4-

 0
 a

 m

 V)
 0
 z

 munal benefits, under some conditions they may be less willing to partici-
 pate if they think the community has not met its obligations.

 While many older people in Patar continued to follow the marabout's
 ndigals, two different trends had developed among male heads of house-
 holds who were in their twenties and thirties.25 The school director esti-
 mated that approximately one-third of them no longer voted in elections,
 while another one-third had started to vote for candidates from opposition
 parties, especially the PDS (School director, 30 January 1995; Village chief,
 6 April 1995; Male villager, 23 June 1995). One man admitted that the
 marabout, while he continued his pre-election visits to Patar to campaign
 for candidates, seemed less enthusiastic about encouraging villagers to par-
 ticipate (Male villager, 13 April 1995). The president of the women's group
 summed up the situation, "The marabout can come here and talk about
 duty and how our vote will make Senegal or the community better, but he
 might as well just be pissing in the wind" (Women's group president, 17
 April 1995).

 Communal participation by Mourides to achieve a larger public good
 has diminished in Patar, as it has throughout Senegal. While submission to
 the Mouride marabout among Patar inhabitants, or Senegalese in general,
 was never absolute, the power of the marabout to make suggestions in one
 area of his followers' lives-the political realm-seems to have decreased
 even more in the past decade. National marabouts appear to have realized
 this fact, while many local marabouts continue to try to mobilize their
 followers in election campaigns. Access to state benefits through local
 marabouts is still possible, but fewer Mourides vote as their marabouts
 desire in order to guarantee these public goods or meet communal obliga-
 tions. Many Mourides have reinterpreted their role in the community be-
 cause of changing circumstances which are outside the control of the tariqa.
 In doing so, they have by-passed opportunities to participate to achieve
 shared goods for the group.26

 As was the case in the Ndoulo forage, the demise of the social con-
 tract and the decreased feeling of citizen obligations among Mourides were
 rooted in larger structural factors. SAPs that decreased spending on state
 agricultural programs meant that the state could not provide the marabouts
 and their followers with as many benefits as in the past. Economic chal-
 lenges beyond the control of the marabouts or their followers (and some
 might argue, the Senegalese state) have led individuals to re-evaluate their
 responsibilities in this subnational group in light of what the group can
 provide. Patar citizens, as other Senegalese Mourides, still identify with
 the Mouride tariqa, feel a close relationship with their marabout, attend
 important Mouride events such as the Magal of Touba, and recite the sto-
 ries and verses of Amadou Bamba (Villal6n 1994b). As in other Mouride
 communities (Beck 1995), Patar Mourides are still relatively willing to lis-
 ten to their religious leaders on personal issues (Village chief, 6 April 1995).
 They simply feel less responsibility to vote as their marabout suggests,
 because this holy man can no longer guarantee the community the same

This content downloaded from 128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 22:01:04 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 C)

 m

 z

 m

 I

 z

 ;I

 z

 -u

 level of access to state resources as in the past. The Mouride case makes an
 interesting point-group identity may not translate into citizen obligations
 when the social contract in a common society has deteriorated.

 Conclusion: The Implications of a Dynamic Citizenship

 Based on the findings from the three case studies, it is possible to
 speculate about the dynamic nature of citizen rights and obligations and to
 suggest areas for future research. The cases illustrate that when people feel
 that their right to participate in an inclusive decision-making process has
 been undermined, they may feel few obligations to the community and not
 participate. The Ndoulo forage committee and Ndoulo GPF illustrated that
 decision making that does not incorporate compromise, consensus, or the
 input of everyone does not encourage involvement, even if that participa-
 tion could lead to a public good on which all depend.

 Views of citizenship and participation may also relate to the ability
 of the community to give individuals access to the rewards of the social
 contract. When the rights of participants to access group benefits are dis-
 missed, people may question their obligations to the society. When the
 community can no longer meet the expectations of participants, or is un-
 able to meet those expectations to the same extent as it did in the past,
 individuals may re-evaluate how they participate in the public arena. They
 may question the reasons for meeting their obligations to the community,
 since the community either will not or cannot honor its part of the social
 contract. Such was the case in the Ndoulo GPF and forage.

 The same situation existed among Mourides nationally and in Patar.
 Many Mouride voters believed that their marabouts could not provide ac-
 cess to as many state benefits as they had in the past. While it is true that
 Mourides never blindly followed their marabouts, their willingness to lis-
 ten to the voting suggestions of the religious leaders has decreased even
 more in recent years. While following the ndigal of the marabout may bring
 the Mouride community some tangible (though small-scale) returns, indi-
 viduals have re-evaluated the obligations of citizenship.

 While the case studies only provide snapshots of three situations, they
 do enable us to see some initial patterns about how inclusive institutions,
 structural changes, and state involvement in so-called autonomous organi-
 zations can affect citizen rights and obligations. First, the institutions for
 making decisions impact how individuals view the balance of rights and
 responsibilities in a common society. The transparency of decision making
 and the accountability of leaders is more likely to encourage individuals to
 see their citizenship positively and to participate to achieve a common
 good. If institutions do not reflect the importance of input from members,
 people are less likely to feel loyalty to those institutions and the decisions
 that come from them. They question the need to responsibly participate in
 a group that ignores their rights of involvement. Citizenship and participa-

This content downloaded from 128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 22:01:04 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 D5
 -I

 0

 -Oa

 -4

 --i

 m

 Ln
 0
 z

 tion are not only about identities tied to group histories or experiences;
 they relate directly to the realization of rights and obligations.

 Second, rights and responsibilities to participate in a society are rarely

 isolated from structural changes at the national or global level. In some
 African contexts, SAPs, which have been required by the World Bank and
 International Monetary Fund, shape how individuals view their role in re-
 lation to the national or local community. Macroeconomic factors influence
 the social contract between individuals and the public realm. They condi-
 tion the choices that communities can make and the ways that individuals
 view their rights and obligations in those communities.

 Third, even in small villages or rural associations, the state influences
 how individuals view their rights and obligations to the social contract.
 The involvement of state actors shapes decision-making processes, which
 over time wears down the obligations of individuals who are excluded. State
 policies, such as the rules for GPF registration in Senegal, create new re-
 quirements or structures which change the relations between leaders and
 followers, and transform the nature of obligations for all group members.
 Policy decisions such as cooptation of women's groups influence the re-
 sources that groups have for their members, and in turn, how their mem-
 bers view the subnational group. Even though the state is external to many
 communities, its interactions with those communities (or even just a mi-
 nority of their members) lead to a reconfiguration of rights and obligations
 among members.

 This point about state influences on citizenship raises a larger ques-
 tion about the resurgence of autonomous groups in rural Senegal. Much of
 the recent social science literature on Africa has argued that because the
 African state can no longer provide for its citizens, grassroots organizations
 have emerged to fill this void (Tripp 1994; Chazan 1988). Women's groups,
 village councils, and local development organizations are assumed to be
 autonomous from state control, a fact which enables them to challenge the
 state and to effectively design programs to meet their members' needs
 (Azarya 1988; Clark 1990). However, the case studies presented here ques-
 tion the level of autonomy of such organizations. Informal state regula-
 tions or ties of friendship between leaders and state officials can decrease
 the autonomy of village groups.

 In Senegal, informal state control over so-called autonomous groups
 appears prevalent not only with the GPFs and forage committees, but also
 with officially-recognized economic development organizations (groupe-
 ment d'interet economique-GIE). As local organizations compete for ac-
 cess to capital, land, and patronage, they may be forced to build ties to state
 actors. For example, many international donors rely on state officials for
 recommendations of village groups which could benefit from externally
 funded projects. Local associations without ties to state actors miss out on
 such external resources, because they have no state official to recommend
 them (Development official in Dakar, 30 June 1995). Further, local organi-
 zations that need trade permits or land access approval must interact with

This content downloaded from 128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 22:01:04 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 :>

 z
 H
 N

 1i,
 z

 m

 c

 0

 I

 z
 z
 --

 r
 0

 z

 --

 c

 state officials, a fact which necessitates their relinquishing some control
 over group policies and programs. While the state in Senegal has become
 less able to overtly control local groups, it continues to have an indirect
 influence on village associations. This situation limits the effectiveness of
 groups and shapes the ways their members view rights and responsibilities.
 Future research is needed to determine if these conclusions about
 citizenship and participation are applicable in contexts other than rural
 Senegal. While it is likely that exclusive decision-making processes, ma-
 nipulative state leaders and policies, and decreased participation by com-
 munity members because of disappointment with the ways a community
 meets its obligations affect citizenship in other venues, more studies are
 needed to clarify and further test these findings. Scholars should also ex-
 amine additional variables that shape how individuals see their rights and
 responsibilities within a community. Such studies could address the
 influence of democratic transitions and multiparty elections on citizen
 obligations, the ways that devolution of government power shapes notions
 of responsibilities at the local level, and the impact of external influences
 such as donor aid or NGO-organized projects on the mutual obligations
 between a particular community and its members.

 NOTES

 1 1 am grateful for insightful comments from Jean Abshire, York Bradshaw, C.R.D. Halisi,

 Angelique Haugerud, Paul Kaiser, Stephen Ndegwa, Zeric Kay Smith, and several anony-

 mous reviewers. Funding for the field research for this article was provided by Indiana

 University Graduate School and the West African Research Association.

 2 I do acknowledge, though, that purposeful noninvolvement can also be considered an

 act of participation, if it is intended to influence decision makers and reflects the rights

 and responsibilities of individuals in the community.

 3 It is estimated that over 90 percent of the total Senegalese population is Muslim. In

 1960, Mourides composed 18 percent of Muslims; by 1985, they were approximately 50

 percent and were most numerous in the Diourbel region (Creevey 1985;Villalon 1995:71,

 98).

 4 I conducted in-depth interviews with over 150 individuals in Ndoulo and over seventy

 individuals in Patar. Interviewees were representative of different economic and educa-

 tional levels, ethnic groups, age groups, and genders. Additionally, I interviewed all com-

 munity leaders in each village. All interviewees were assured that they would remain anony-

 mous in all publications.

 5 Class is a difficult concept to define in rural Africa because of the incomplete nature of

 capitalist development. However, differences between people based on income, educa-

 tion, and ties to state resources are apparent even in rural communities (Sklar 1979).

 6 These officials included the sub-prefect (sous-prefet),the Head of the Rural Expansion Cen-

 ter (chef du CER), and officials at the Water Department in Diourbel.The sous-prefet is the

This content downloaded from 128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 22:01:04 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 administrative officer at the arrondissement level who oversees tax collection and land

 use and implements state regulations.The chef du CER allocates development funds and is

 in charge of the Rural Expansion Center team (Centre d'Expansion Rurale-CER), a group of

 government specialists in the areas of sanitation, agricultural development, women's

 development, and forestry management who work and live in the arrondissement capitals

 of Senegal. An arrondissement is an area of administration that contains approximately

 1 00 villages.

 7 The following information came from my observations of the forage community meeting

 held on 17 March 1995 in Ndoulo. Interviews conducted after the meeting with commit-

 tee members and villagers were used to supplement the observations.

 8 These individuals'other choice would have been to disengage from involvement with the

 forage committee.

 9 It seemed logical to have at least one woman on the redressment committee, since wom-

 en were the village group most affected by problems with the forage. If the forage did not

 work,women had to walk to nearby villages to pull water and then carry it home. Even one

 male committee member admitted,'lf the women ran the forage, they would make sure it

 never broke down" (Male forage committee member, 13 June 1995).

 10 This information is from observations of forage and redressment committee meetings held

 in Ndoulo and attended by the author on 26 March 1995,8 April 1995,5 May 1995,6 June
 1995, and 8 July 1995. Interviews with members confirmed these observations.

 11 Six hundred of Ndoulo's approximately 1,700 residents were adults. Ndoulo had approxi-

 mately 300 households, each composed of an average of two adults and four children

 (Sous-prefet, 8 June 1994).

 12 These price increases did not include the aforementioned proposed increase of March

 1995.

 13 22,000 CFA is roughly $44, using the 1995 exchange rate of 500 CFA/$1.

 14 The monitrice (or female instructor) works on women's development projects within the

 arrondissement and is under the direction of the chef du CER.

 15 The population contained within the territory of the Diourbel departement is approxi-

 mately 150,000 and there are over 400 villages in the area (Ministere de l'Economie 1993:
 18).

 16 The chef du CER explained that the group could not hold elections because all village GPFs

 1-4
 pO

 0

 w

 -Q

 m

 tn
 0
 z

 in Senegal were being reorganized and local elections would be disruptive to this process.

 However, this argument seemed a bit inconsistent since GPFs in several surrounding vil-
 lages elected new leaders in 1995 (Chef du CER, 22 February 1995). The chef du CER also

 maintained that one women's development group per village should be sufficient (Chef

 du CER, 3 December 1994).The monitrice explained that state policy forbade the village
 from having more than one GPF, but that women could organize more traditional groups

 if they desired (Monitrice, 18 May 1995).

 1 7 The following information came from my observations of the GPF meeting held on 19 May

 1995 in Ndoulo, Senegal, and from follow-up interviews of participants.

 18 1,500 CFA is roughly $3. Both interviewees who discussed this project spoke favorably of
 it.While they would have liked to have received more money for themselves,they realized

 the importance of reinvesting in future projects.They both reiterated that the majority of

 group members made the decision to reinvest part of the profits.

 19 I focus on Patar instead of Ndoulo for the study of rural Mourides because all Patar resi-

This content downloaded from 128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 22:01:04 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 1-A.
 p;

 0

 -I

 m

 NJ
 z
 -4

 0
 z

 m
 4

 -4
 z

 z

 n

 z

 dents identify themselves as Mourides, while only half of Ndoulo inhabitants do (Patar

 village chief, 13 April 1995).

 20 In Senegal, there are numerous individuals who call themselves marabouts or shaykh

 (serin in Wolof). They serve as patrons to their followers, providing them with spiritual

 guidance and at times, material assistance. Donal B. Cruise O'Brien (1971) estimated that

 there were over 300 marabouts in Senegal. In the Mouride tariqa, anyone who has follow-

 ers and knows the wird, or special prayer formula which was attributed to Amadou Bamba,

 may be called a marabout. Many of these are rural individuals,who live with their followers

 and have very close relations with them. All Mourides also follow the xalifa-general, who

 has his headquarters in Touba, supervises all Mouride collective enterprises,and is a direct

 descendant of Amadou Bamba. In Patar, villagers have a personal relationship with Aliou

 Mbacke of Touba, though they give their ultimate allegiance to the Mouride xalifa-gen-

 eral.

 21 The PS has gone through several name changes, from the Bloc Democratique Senegalais

 (Senegalese People's Bloc-BPS) in 1 956,to the Union ProgressisteSenegalaise (Senegalese

 Progressive Union-UPS) in 1958, to the PS in 1976.

 22 While maraboutic control is not absolute, the adoration of followers is evident. When

 marabouts visit rural villages, they are welcomed warmly and treated with honor. In a dis-

 play of devotion, all Mouride followers in Patar who were physically able attended the

 yearly field clearing for their marabout near Touba in May 1995.

 23 While the end of agricultural programs has hurt peasants, it is less clear that the marabouts

 have been as financially devastated as their followers. Mohamed Mbodji (1991:125) ar-

 gues that the marabouts have "experienced a serious drop in income and a reduction in

 their prestige."On the other hand, today not all Mouride marabouts are tied to agriculture

 as they were a decade ago. Many have become more involved in urban and international

 trade and have not been harmed by the end of state agricultural programs (Cruise O'Brien

 1988: 139-143;Villal6n 1995:69).

 24 No doubt, some of this decrease in turnout is because of the 1993 Senegalese electoral

 code which tried to curb electoral fraud through the use of indelible ink, better proce-

 dures for counting ballots, and mandatory use of the secret ballot.

 25 Though there was a generational difference in voting trends among Patar's Mouride vot-

 ers, I do not have evidence that this pattern existed nationally.The PDS has relied on younger

 voters but a clear pattern of generational split among Senegalese is unclear (See also

 Villal6n 1994a.)

 26 In some cases, voter abstention can reflect notions of communal obligations. When ab-

 stention is organized and purposeful, it can convey a message from the community and

 reflect the responsibilities that individuals feel toward the community. However, in the

 case of the Mourides, voter abstention has not appeared to be aimed at larger objectives

 and has not reflected ideas of duty to the group.

 REFERENCES CITED

 Aristotle. 1982. The Politics.Translated byT.A. Sinclair. New York: Penguin.

 Azarya, Victor. 1988. Reordering State-Society Relations: Incorporation and Disengagement. In The

This content downloaded from 128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 22:01:04 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Precarious Balance:State andSociety in Africa, edited by Donald Rothchild and Naomi Chazan.

 Boulder, CO: Westview Press.

 Bachrach, Peter and Morton Baratz. 1962.The Two Faces of Power. American Political Science Review

 59:947-52.

 Barbalet, J.M. 1988. Citizenship. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

 Beck, Linda. 1995.'Mouridisme Moderne': The Changing Role of Religion and Politics in Senegal.

 Paper presented at the African Studies Association Conference, November 3-6, Orlando,

 Florida.

 Behrman, Lucy. 1970. Muslim Brotherhoods in Senegal. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

 Chazan, Naomi. 1982. The New Politics of Participation in Tropical Africa. Comparative Politics 14:

 169-90.

 1988. Patterns of State-Society Incorporation and Disengagement in Africa. In The Precari-

 ous Balance:State and Society in Africa, edited by Donald Rothchild and Naomi Chazan. Boul-

 der, CO:Westview Press.

 Clark, John. 1990. Democratizing Development: The Role of Voluntary Organizations. West Hartford,

 CT: Kumarian Press.

 0--I
 pC

 0

 -4

 m

 a

 Creevey, Lucy. 1985. Muslim Brotherhoods and Politics in Senegal.Journal of Modern African Studies

 23:715-21.

 Coulon, Christian. 1976. Prophetes de Dieu ou Prophetes Anti-Colonialism: Quelques Reflexions a

 z

 0

 Partir d'Exemples Senegalais.African Perspectives 2:45-60.

 Coulon, Christian and Donal B. Cruise O'Brien. 1989. Senegal. In Contemporary West African States,

 edited by Donal B. Cruise O'Brien, John Dunn, and Richard Rathbone. New York: Cambridge

 University Press.

 Cruise O'Brien, Donal B. 1 970.The Saint and the Squire: Personalities and Social Forces in the Devel-

 opment of a Religious Brotherhood. In African Perspectives: Papers in the History, Politics, and

 Economics of Africa Presented to Thomas Hodgkin, edited by Christopher Allen and Richard

 William Johnson. New York: Cambridge University Press.

 1971. The Mourides of Senegal. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

 .1979. Ruling Class and Peasantry in Senegal, 1960-1976:The Politics of a Monocrop Economy.

 In The Political Economy of Underdevelopment: Dependence in Senegal, edited by Rita Cruise

 O'Brien. Beverly Hills, CA: SAGE Publications.

 1983. Les elections Senegalais de 27 F6vrier 1983. PolitiqueAfricaine 1 1: 7-12.

 .1988. Charisma Comes to Town: Mouride Urbanization 1945-1986. In Charisma and Brother-
 hood inAfrican Islam,edited by Donal Cruise O'Brien and Christian Coulon.Oxford:Clarendon

 Press.

 .1 993.The Byways of Democracy. WestAfrica. 15 February: 238-40.

 Fatton, Robert. 1986. Gramsci and the Legitimization of the State:The Case of the Senegalese Pas-

 sive Revolution. Canadian Journal of Political Science 19:729-50.

 .1988. Bringing the Ruling Class Back In. Comparative Politics 20:253-64.

 Gyimah-Boadi, E. 1 994.Associational Life,Civil Society,and Democratization in Ghana. In CivilSociety

 and the State in Africa,edited by John Harbeson, Donald Rothchild,and Naomi Chazan. Boul-
 der, CO: Lynne Rienner.

 Halisi, C.R.D. 1997. From Liberation to Citizenship: Identity and Citizenship in Black South African

 Political Thought. Comparative Studies in Society and History 39:66-85.

 Hirshmann, David. 1991. Women and Political Participation in Africa: Broadening The Scope of Re-

 search. World Development 19:1679-94.

This content downloaded from 128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 22:01:04 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 -I

 0
 0

 ON

 I
 m

 z

 :>

 z

 H
 c

 m

 0

 n

 C'

 m
 z
 Ul
 I
 -v

 z

 9 -v

 H

 -v

 H

 0
 z

 Hyden, Goran. 1980. Beyond Ujamaa in Tanzania: Underdevelopment and an Uncaptured Peasantry.

 Los Angeles: University of California Press.

 Ka, Samba and Nicolas van de Walle. 1 992. The Political EconomyofAdjustment in Senegal: 1980-1991.

 Dakar: US Agency for International Development.

 Klein, Martin. 1968. Islam and Imperialism in Senegal:Sine-Saloum, 1847-1914. Stanford, CA: Stanford

 University Press.

 Knight, Jack. 1992. Institutions and Social Conflict. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

 Konneh,Augustine. 1 996.Citizenship at the Margins: Status, Ambiguity and the Mandingo of Liberia.

 African Studies Review 39:141-54.

 Lewis, John. 1987. Aid, Structural Adjustment, and Senegalese Agriculture. In The Political Economy

 of Risk and Choice in Senegal, edited by Mark Gersovitz and John Waterbury. London: Frank

 Cass.

 Markovitz, Irving Leonard. 1970.Traditional Social Structure, the Islamic Brotherhoods, and Political

 Development in Senegal.Journal of Modern African Studies 8:73-96.

 Marshall,Thomas H. 1964. Class, Citizenship, and Social Development. New York: Doubleday.

 Mbodji, Mohamed. 1991.The Politics of Independence: 1960-1986. In The Political Economy of Sene-

 gal under StructuralAdjustment, edited by Christopher Delgado and Sidi Jammeh. New York:

 Praeger.

 Miller, David. 1995. Citizenship and Pluralism. Political Studies 43: 432-50.

 Minist6re de l'Economie, des Finances et du Plan. 1993. Situation Economique. Dakar: Republic of

 Senegal Printing Office.

 Morgenthau, Ruth. 1964. Political Parties in French Speaking WestAfrica. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

 Mwaniki, Nyaga. 1986. Against Many Odds:The Dilemmas of Women's Self-Help Groups in Mbeere,

 Kenya.Africa 56:210-27.

 Ndegwa, Stephen. 1997. Citizenship and Ethnicity: An Examination of Two Transition Moments in

 Kenyan Politics.American Political Science Review 91:599-616.

 Nelson, Nici. 1981. Mobilizing Village Women: Some Organization and Management Considerations.

 In African Women in the Development Process, edited by Nici Nelson. London: Frank Cass.

 Niang, Oumoul Khayri. 1991. Femmes dans le Secteur Prive au Senegal: Situation etAlternative. Dakar:

 US Agency for International Development.

 Oldfield, Adrian. 1990. Citizenship: An Unnatural Practice? Political Quarterly 61:177-87.

 Patterson, Amy. 1996. Participation and Democracy at the Grassroots: A Study of Development

 Projects in Rural Senegal. Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Political Science, Indiana Univer-

 sity, Bloomington, IN.

 Rousseau, Jean-Jacques. 1968. The Social Contract. Translated by Maurice Cranston. New York: Pen-

 guin.

 Savane,Vieux. 1995. Deficit de citoyennete? Sud quotidien. 6 April: 1.

 Sklar, Richard. 1979.The Nature of Class Domination in Africa. Journal of Modern African Studies 17:

 531-52.

 Stewart, Angus. 1995.Two Conceptions of Citizenship. British Journal of Sociology 46:63-79.

 Teague, Elizabeth. 1991. Women in Development:lmplementing a GenderAction Plan. Dakar: US Agency

 for International Development.

 Trimingham, John. 1962.A History of Islam in West Africa. London: Oxford University Press.

 Tripp, Aili Mari. 1994. Rethinking Civil Society: Gender Implications in Contemporary Tanzania. In

 Civil Society and the State in Africa, edited by John Harbeson, Donald Rothchild, and Naomi

 Chazan. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner.

This content downloaded from 128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 22:01:04 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Turner, Bryan. 1993. Citizenship and Social Theory. London: SAGE Publications.

 Villal6n, Leonardo. 1 994a. Democratizing a (Quasi) Democracy: The Senegalese Elections of 1993.

 African Affairs 93:163-93.

 . 1 994b. Sufi Rituals as Rallies: Religious Ceremonies in the Politics of Senegalese State-Soci-

 ety Relations. Comparative Politics 26:415-38.

 .1995. Islamic Society and State Power in Senegal. New York: Cambridge University Press

 -;
 0
 -o

 ew

 H
 a

 m -0
 z. --

This content downloaded from 128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 22:01:04 UTC

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

