DATE DOWNLOADED: Wed Dec  9 09:30:37 2020
SOURCE: Content Downloaded from  HeinOnline

Citations:

Bluebook 21st ed.(cid:10)
Gregory G. A. Tzeutschler, Growing Security: Land Rights and Agricultural Development
in Northern Senegal, 43 J. AFR. L. 36 (1999).                                        

(cid:9)                                                                

ALWD 6th ed.                                                                         
Tzeutschler, G. G., Growing security: Land rights and agricultural development in
northern senegal, 43(1) J. Afr. L. 36 (1999).                                        

APA 7th ed.                                                                          
Tzeutschler, G. G. (1999). Growing security: Land rights and agricultural development
in northern senegal. Journal of African Law, 43(1), 36-62.                           

Chicago 7th ed.                                                                      
Gregory G. A. Tzeutschler, "Growing Security: Land Rights and Agricultural
Development in Northern Senegal," Journal of African Law 43, no. 1 (1999): 36-62     

McGill Guide 9th ed.                                                                 
Gregory G A Tzeutschler, "Growing Security: Land Rights and Agricultural Development
in Northern Senegal" (1999) 43:1 J Afr L 36.                                         

AGLC 4th ed.                                                                         
Gregory GA Tzeutschler, 'Growing Security: Land Rights and Agricultural Development
in Northern Senegal' (1999) 43(1) Journal of African Law 36.                         

MLA 8th ed.                                                                          
Tzeutschler, Gregory G. A. "Growing Security: Land Rights and Agricultural
Development in Northern Senegal." Journal of African Law, vol. 43, no. 1, 1999, p.
36-62. HeinOnline.                                                                   

OSCOLA 4th ed.                                                                       
Gregory G A Tzeutschler, 'Growing Security: Land Rights and Agricultural Development
in Northern Senegal' (1999) 43 J Afr L 36

Provided by: 
University of Florida / Lawton Chiles Legal Information Center

-- Your use of this HeinOnline PDF indicates your acceptance of HeinOnline's Terms and 
   Conditions of the license agreement available at 

https://heinonline.org/HOL/License

-- The search text of this PDF is generated from  uncorrected OCR text.
-- To obtain permission to use this article beyond the scope of your  license, please use:

Copyright Information

(cid:9)
(cid:9)
Journal  of African  Law,  43:  36-62

GROWING  SECURITY:  LAND  RIGHTS  AND

AGRICULTURAL  DEVELOPMENT  IN  NORTHERN

SENEGAL

GREGORY  G.  A.  TZEUTSCHLER*

INTRODUCTION

Are  "traditional"  or  "indigenous"  land  rights  an  obstacle  to  development?
The  question  seems  simple  enough.  And  the  liberal  economic  perspective
currently  being  advanced  by  free  market  advocates  such  as  the  Bretton  Woods
institutions  answers:  yes,  to  the  extent  that  those  traditional  relations  hinder  the
free  exchange  of land,  they  do  slow  development.  But  of course  the  question  is
more  complex  and  requires  answers  to  a  number  of subsidiary  and  ancillary
questions.  Some are  definitional  and  empirical:  what  are  these  "traditional  land
rights"?  To  what  extent  do  they,  rather  than  codified  law  or  administrative
practices,  define  the  relationships  of social  actors  and groups  to land and  to each
other  through  land?  Other  questions  are  more  hypothetical:  what  are  the
alternatives  to  the  current  regime,  what  costs  would  installing  them  incur,  and
what would be  their costs  and benefits,  once  in place?  Finally,  there are  ancillary,
but still  central  questions:  what  other factors,  such  as  ecological  conditions,  state
policies  and  non-state  institutions,  may  account  for  development  or  the  lack
thereof, apart  from land  tenure  regimes?

I  address  the  theoretical  questions  first,  in  the  abstract.  This  theoretical
perspective  frames  the  rest  of  the  article,  which  is  an  examination  of  these
relationships  and  their effects  on  development  in  the  south  bank  of the  Senegal
River  Valley,  known  as  the  Fuuta  Tooro.  This  stretches  several  hundred  miles
from  Richard-Toll  in  the  west,  near  the  head  of  the  Senegal  River  Delta,
upstream  almost  to  Matam  in  the  east.  It  is  almost  entirely  rural;  its  few  towns
do  not  exceed  20,000  in  population,  and  most  villages,  themselves  spread  far
apart,  have  populations  in  the  hundreds.  The  majority  of  the  population  in
the  region  is  Haalpulaar,  or  Pulaar-speaking,  a  large  ethnolinguistic  group
characterized  by  lasting  caste  distinctions  and  strong  Islamic  convictions.  The
historically  sedentary,  agriculturalist  Haalpulaar  are  the  Toucouleur, while  their
historically  nomadic,  pastoralist  linguistic  cousins  are  the  Peul.'

Traditionally,  the  most fertile  and  prestigious  lands  in  the  region  have  been
on  the  waalo  floodplain,  while  the  intermediate  foonde  lands  and  the  rain-fed
dieri  highlands  have  been  less  sought  after,  owing  to  the  unreliability  of rains  in
the  semi-arid  Western  Sahel.  The  damming  of the  Senegal  River  at  Manantali
has  disrupted  flood  cycles  and  made  irrigation  possible,  and  the  foonde  lands
are  now  the  site  of many  irrigation  works,  and  have  become  more  desirable.

Nationally,  land  law  does  not reflect  the  lasting  influence  of traditional  rulers
in  areas  like  the  Fuuta  Tooro.  The  Senegalese  nation  owns  nearly  all  the  land
in  the  country,  and  rural  municipalities  administer  it.  The  national  land  law,
the  Loi relative au Domaine National, passed  in  1964,  dictates  that municipalities  are

J.D.,  Columbia  University  School  of Law.
Pulaar,  or  Peul,  is  a  language  related  to  Fulani,  various forms  of which  are  spoken  mostly  by

herders  throughout  the  Sahel.

©  1999  School  of Oriental  and  African  Studies

Vol.  43,  No.  I

Growing Securio,

to  give  current  tenants  formal  rights  to  land,  provided  the  tenants  can  put  the
land to  productive  use.

The municipal  councils  are  democratically  elected,  but  are,  for the  most part,
firmly entrenched  in  a network of patron-client  relations involving  the Senegalese
state,  the  ruling  Socialist  Party,  and  local  elites,  who  often  belong  to  traditional
high-status  religious  classes.  Because  the  sway  of these  religious  elites  remains
particularly strong  in the  study region,  they  tend to  dominate  the  councils there.
Historically,  the  Senegalese  state  has  also  involved  itself in  agriculture  through
parastatals  and  agencies  that  provide  rural  credit  or  monopolize  the  marketing
of  agricultural  products.  They  often  require  farmers  to  use  certain  techniques
and  inputs,  but  have  rarely  effected  long-term  improvements  in  productivity.
The effects  of these  state  activities  must  qualify  statements  on  the  effects  of land
rights  on  development.

For  the purposes  of this  study,  "development"  is  defined  as  measures  taken-

including  capital,  permanent  and  annual  investments  and  capacity-building
techniques-that  are  likely  to  result  in long-term  increases  in  crop  yields  and  in
commensurate  increases  in  net  income  from  farming:  this  is  assumed  to  be  a
desirable  goal,  given  variable  weather  conditions,  population  pressures  and  the
monetization  of  the  rural  economy.  Such  development  may  be  hastened  by
capital  investments  such  as  irrigation  works,  productivity-enhancing  chemicals
and  machinery,  and  higher-yielding  crop  strains,  and  by  experimentation  with
various  farming  techniques.  The  intermediate  goals  of these  improvements  are
shorter fallow periods, multiple crop seasons,  and improved responses  to changing
climactic  conditions.

Predicting the effects  of the introduction  of such changes  requires  consideration
of the  dialectic  effects  of the economic  changes  and  the  social  structures  on  each
other.  Technical  or  social  change  imported  in  the  name  of development  may
transform  those  structures;  indeed,  this  transformation  may  be  one  of the goals
of development,  for  example  to  effect  a  more  equitable  distribution  of control
over resources.  However,  the existing institutions may also affect the development
such  that  its  effect  may  be  negligible,  or  contrary  to  what  was  intended.  This
article  primarily  undertakes  a  qualitative  microeconomic  analysis  of  the  effects
of overlapping  systems  of land  rights  on agricultural  production.  Some study  of
institutions  and their history is  essential  to this  analysis-inasmuch  as these  affect
the  choices  of discrete  economic  actors or  of groupings-but  this is  not primarily
a  study  of institutional  economic  change.

Moreover,  since  this  is  a  primarily  economic  analysis  where  effects  on  land
use  and  crop  production  and  distribution  are  the  gauge  of any  measure  taken,
social  change  is  taken  as  important  mainly  in  instrumental  terms,  rather  than
because  of  the  inherent  value  of  any  existing  social  systems.  This  is  not  to  say
that  past,  current  or  potential  systems  are  without  relative  inherent  value,  but
only  that  such judgments  are  not  significant  in  this  analysis.  Inevitably,  values
do  permeate  the  analysis.  I  consider  that  equitable  distribution  is  desirable  to
avoid human suffering and promote social stability, and that efficiency is important
in  preventing  waste  and  making  maximum  use  of  available  resources.  The
article's  analysis  considers  both  values,  without  privileging  either.

Finally,  to  explain  the  understanding  and  use  of  the  tradition-modernity
dichotomy:  in the study area, "traditional"  leaders  are usually elders and religious
figures,  and,  hence,  members  of a  high  caste.  It  is  likely  that  some  aspects  of

38 

Growing Security 

[1999] J.A.L.

the  "traditional"  society  that  they  claim  to  describe,  represent  and  defend,  do
not  in  fact  date  from  the  pre-colonial  era.  Nevertheless,  these  figures  retain
considerable  authority  in  the  study  area,  and  their  claims  that  a  practice  is  a
"tradition"  seem rarely to meet with  challenges on their own terms. This approach
is  not  analytically  dangerous  because  other  groups  have  rarely  challenged  the
legitimacy  of traditional  elites by  questioning  the  accuracy  of those  elites'  claims
that they are defending long-standing  traditions. Of course,  this  trope  of tradition
is primarily useful  in opposition,  specifically  to the concept  of "modem"  practices
and modes.  I  will  use  this  latter  term  to  designate  characteristics  and modalities
that  differ  from  "traditions",  though  they  may  be  bound  by  little  else.

THEORIES  OF  LAND  RIGHTS  AND  AGRICULTURAL  PRODUCTIVrrY

Traditional and modern  tenure:  liberal perspectives

Theories  of  agricultural  development  posit  a  continuum  from  communal
control  of  land  by  a  lineage  group  or  village,  to  more  individualized  tenure
by  households  or  individuals.  In  communal  systems,  a  small  elite  frequently
monopolizes  the authority  to  allocate  all  the land, but those  elites  generally  may
not  sell  the  land.2  Thus,  an  individual's  or  household's  land  is  not  inalienable,
but  rather  "exointransmissible":  no-one  may  alienate  usage  rights  to  anyone
outside  the  relevant  community,  but  those  rights  are  more  mobile  within  it.3
Social  restrictions,  based  on gender  or  caste,  may limit  the  land  available  to  an
individual  or  a  family.  Traditional  authorities  are  more  likely  to  enforce  these
distinctions  for  more  valued  lands,  often  the  most  fertile  ones,  or  where  strict
religious  or  other  taboos  support  the  distinctions.

Many  communal  systems  in Africa  also  grant  separate  rights  to various  users.
One  farmer may  be  allowed  to farm  annual  crops  on a tract,  another  may have
rights  to  its  tree  crops,  and  a  pastoralist  may  have  transhumance  and  grazing
rights  after  the  annual  harvest.  Noronha  and  Lethem  identify  the  multiple-use
pattern  as  a  potential  source  of  conflict  over  land  control,  and  of  decreased
tenure  security,  depressing  the  land's  value.4  But  productivity  for  a  single  use,
such  as  annual  crops  alone,  especially  in  infertile  areas,  may  be  quite  low.  In
addition,  flexibility  in  access  to  land  allows  farmers  to  spread  the  risks  of crop
failure  or  low  yields. 5

Still,  some  requirements  in  multiple-use  systems  do restrict  a  farmer's  ability
to  experiment.  Supposedly  as  a result  of this  inflexibility,  of under-investment  in
land  due  to  the  insecurity  of tenure,  and  of the  overuse  of commons  land,  crop
yields have  contracted to  below  subsistence  levels  in  many  areas.  These  theories
hold  that  the  regime  of open  access  to  land  creates  a  collective  action  problem,

2  Such  sales  would  be  "unconstitutional",  i.e.,  "they  were  expressly  precluded  from  the covenant
that  formed  the  basis  of the  social  contract  creating  the  community."  Rogier  van  den  Brink  and
Daniel  W.  Bromley,  The  Enclosures Revisited:  Privatization, Titling,  and  the  Quest for Advantage  in  Africa,
Working  Paper  19,  Washington,  DC,  1992,  11.

3 Monique  Caverivihre  and  Marc  Dhbne,  Le  drsitfoncier sdgalais, Paris,  1988,  67.
4 Raymond  Noronha  and  Francis J. Lethem,  Traditional Land  Tenures  and Land  Use  Systems  in  the

Design of Agricultural Projects, Staff Working Paper  No.  561,  Washington,  DC,  1983,  iii-v  and  16.

5 Van  den  Brink  and Bromley,  op.  cit.,  n.  2,  8-9.

Vol.  43,  No.  I

Growing  Security

in that neither landholders  nor tenants  internalize  the  cost of the  soil degradation
or  other  results  of misuse  or  overuse. 6

Some  theorists  have  suggested  that  societies  move  spontaneously  along  this
continuum  from  communal  to  individual  land  tenure  as  populations  grow  and
demand  for land  increases.  As  population  increases  and the monetized  economy
penetrates  rural  areas,  the  value of land increases,  encouraging  a long-term  view
of land's value  and measures  to improve security. Landholders  and users therefore
invest  in  technological  inputs,  enhancing  both  efficiency  and productivity.'  But
this  transition  is  in  fact  not  automatic  or  complete,  even  in  situations  of
commercialization  and  population  growth.  Even  where  the  original  landholder
"sells"  the land, continued  obligations  to the original  landholders  frequently limit
the  "buyer's"  own  ability to alienate the land.8 And where tenure has become  more
individualized,  neither increased investment in land nor improved productivity has
resulted.'

Increasing  land  scarcity  does  decrease  the  flexibility  required  for  risk-min-
imization  strategies  such  as  multiple  uses  and  open  access,  as  users  adopt  long-
term strategies-such  as  tree planting-that  make  assets more  specific  to a single
user.  Of course,  such  asset  specificity  for  one  party  diminishes  the  flexibility  of
others.  If  a  community  or  a  landholder  sees  such  activities  as  against  their
interests,  they  may  block  them  with  the  censure  of traditional  authorities,  where
these  remain  strong.  Thus,  there  is  pressure  for  the  individualization  of tenure
to  come  into  effect,  but  the  transition  is  not  automatic.' 0

Liberal  economic  theory  thus  frames  communal  systems  as  adapted  to  sub-
sistence  farming,  but inadequate  for  cash cropping,  investment  or  development.
This  position  advocates  titling  property  to  individuals  to  solve  the  problem  of
rising  external  costs  from  land's  misuse  or  overuse  in  communal  systems.  But
the  process  of titling creates  opportunities  for rent-seeking  behaviour. And,  once

6 See  generally  Ester  Boserup,  The  Conditions of Agricultural Growth: The Economics  of Agrarian Change
under  Population Pressure, Chicago,  1965.  Alternatively,  strengthening  the  traditional  institutions  that
regulate  access  to  and  management  of land,  can ensure  internalization  of costs  by users.  See  Kevin
Cleaver  and  Gbtz  Schreiber,  "The  population,  environment,  and  agriculture  nexus  in  sub-Saharan
Africa",  in  Srivastava  and  Alderman  (eds.),  Agriculture and Environmental Challenges, Washington,  DC,
1992,  204-208.  I  refer  to those  who  traditionally  control  land's  allocation  and  use as  "landholders",
because  they  do  not  own  the  land;  typically  the  entire  community  does,  but  member(s)  of the  elite
have  primary  decision-making  authority.  Under  Senegalese  law,  the entire  Senegalese  nation  owns
most of these  lands.  I  refer  to those  who  farm the land in  exchange  for  rent payments  to landholders
in  tender  or  in  kind  as  "tenants".  "User"  or  "farmer"  refers  to  anyone  actually  farming  the  land,
whether  landholder  or tenant, or,  occasionally,  a  low-caste  farmer  who  does  not  have  a  clear  claim
to  the  land,  but  who  does  not  pay  any  rent.  In  the  study  region,  landholders  are  often  referred  to
asproprictaires ("owners"), indicating  some permeation  of capitalist notions  of land ownership,  although
very  few  "owners"  have  freehold  title  to  the  land.

See,  generally,  Boserup,  op.  cit.,  n.  6;  see  also  Hans  P.  Binswanger  and  Mark  R.  Rosenzweig,
"Behavioral  and  material  determinants  of  production  relations  in  agriculture",  (1986)  3  Journal of
Development  Studies  503-539;  Gershon  Feder  and  Raymond  Noronha,  "Land  rights  systems  and
agricultural  development  in  sub-Saharan  Africa",  (1987)  2  World  Bank  Research  Observer  143-167;
Noronha  and  Lethem,  op.  cit.,  n.  4,  17.

s  Robert  M.  Hecht,  "Immigration,  land  transfer  and  tenure  changes  in  Divo,  Ivory  Coast,
1940-80",  (1985)  3  Africa  319-336,  331-332.  That  is,  the  "buyer"  has  not  obtained  absolute  tide
free  of  obligations  to  the  "seller".  The  social  structures  are  often  strong  enough,  as  in  the  study
region,  that  they  resist  the  prestures  that  would  otherwise  lead  to  the  emergence  of a  market,  or
adapt  to  those  pressures  without  allowing  a  market  to  develop  fully.  Jean-Philippe  Platteau,  Land
Reform  and Structural Adjustment in  Sub-Saharan Africa: Controversies and Guidelines,  Economic  and  Social
Development  Paper  107,  Rome,  1992,  132.

9 John  R.  Heath,  Land Rights  in  C6te  d'Ivoire:  Survey  and Prospects for  Project Intervention, Technical

Paper  No.  238,  Washington,  DC,  1993,  5.

0  Platteau,  op.  cit.,  n.  8,  133-134;  van  den  Brink  and  Bromley,  op.  cit.,  n.  2,  13-16,  19-20.

G~owing Secrity

[1999]  J.A.L.

established,  property  rights  do  not  guarantee  the  security  of  tenure,  but  only
shift  the  contest  over  that  tenure  out  of the  arena  of the  traditional  authorities.
When  clearly  defined  and  consistently  enforced,  however,  such  rights  may
increase  the  predictability  of these  conflicts'  outcomes,  increasing  security  and
decreasing  transaction  costs and  risk  premiums.  Still,  the  absence  of secure  title
to  land  as  collateral  may  also  inhibit the  development  of efficient,  private  rural
credit  markets,  and  the  resulting  absence  of credit  may  slow development."

But  these  and  other  liberal  critiques  overlook  the  significant  adaptability  of
traditional  systems. These  do, in  fact, have  a capacity for social  control to prevent
free-riders  in  situations  of land  scarcity,  and  this  secure  tenure  ensures  a  future
income  stream  and  makes  the  farmer  a  better  credit  risk  even  while  his  land
may  not  be  mortgaged. 2  Liberal  economic  theories  also  assume  a  wider  range
of choices  for  actors  than  is  available  to  non-elites  in  rural  African  society.  The
recommendations  of specialization  in production and minimization of risk through
the  market  ignore  the  absence  of  developed  and  reliable  markets  for  goods,
insurance,  credit  and  capital,  and  the  resulting  lack  of transactional  flexibility.
The traditional systems  are  two steps ahead  of the  economists. The risk-spreading
strategies  in  traditional  production  techniques  and  tenancy  arrangements  create
a  production  flexibility  that  substitutes  for  transactional  flexibility."'

The  accuracy  of land  prices  in  a  free  market  in  Africa  and  the  development
of an  ancillary credit  market  are also basically  questionable.  Land  may also  have
value  as  a  source  of  social  identity,  and  offers  financial  security  compared  to
other investments,  including  capital,  in  economies  with high  inflation and  where
relatively  few  other  investment  opportunities  exist.  Elites  may  thus  accumulate
land  for  uses  other  than  as  a  productive  resource,  though  they  may  not  be
efficient  farmers,  moving  the  land's  price  away  from  its  marginal  productivity.
Speculation  in  land  could  produce  bubbles,  pricing  the  poor  out  of the  market
and  sacrificing  the  scarce  capital  of inexperienced  buyers  during  bubbles.  Also
the  ancillary  credit  market  might  not develop  automatically  in  a  system with  an
incomplete  system  of financial  intermediation  and judicial  enforcement,  as large
borrowers  with  political  connections  could  block  the  enforcement  of debts. 1
'

Liberal  economic  theory  also  underestimates  the  rootedness  of land  tenure  in
broader  society.  It views  many  of these  social  relations  as  simply  giving  rise  to
market imperfections  such as  externalities  and transaction  costs, and  it measures
the  simple economic  cost of these relations 5  using  the baseline  of a liberal  system
of individually  held,  freely  alienable  land,  valued  as  a productive  asset.  In  fact,
land  also  serves  social  functions,  defining  the  membership  and  status  of its  users
and  holders,  and  spiritual  ones,  mediating  between  the  living  world  and  the
sacred.  Liberal  economic  theory  ignores  these  relations,  which  it would upset  in
the  name  of  efficiency,  and  the  economic  and  social  costs  that  such  change
would entail.  If wage labourers on large farms feel that they have been dispossessed
from  ancestral  lands,  their  employers  may  incur  increased  supervision  costs.
Rural labourers  and even tenant farmers  may be less productive, due to alienation

1  Ibid.,  112-117,  148,  183-187,  239-242; John  W.  Bruce,  Land Tenure  Issues in Project Design and
Strategies for Agricultural Development in  Sub-Saharan Africa, LTC  Paper  128,  Madison,  1986,  24;  Van  den
Brink  and  Bromley,  op. cit.,  n.  2,  20-22.

'2  Platteau,  op.  cit.,  n.  8,  120-127;  Bruce,  op.  cit.,  n.  11,  24.
B  Van  den  Brink  and  Bromley,  op.  cit.,  n.  2,  17-18.
"4  Platteau,  op.  cit.,  n.  8,  70-80,  196-198,  240-241.
'5  Bruce,  op. cit.,  n.  11,  24.

Vol.  43,  No.  1 

Growing Security 

41

from  land  and  work.  These  increased  costs  might lead  landowners  to  substitute
capital  for  labour,  despite  prevailing  low  wages  and  high  capital  costs.  Finally,
these processes  and government policies  may exacerbate  the gaps between  classes,
and,  in  extreme  cases,  threaten  political  stability.' 6

Small  landowners  are  also  likely  to  incur  more  debt  than  they  can  repay.
Inexperienced  debtors  may  have  inadequate  information  about  their  future
productivity  (especially  after  investment  in  new  improvements),  and  may  be
pressured  by  predatory  lenders  more  interested  in  the  collateral  (the land) than
in  the  interest. These  problems  are  internal to  land  and  credit markets  and may
be  corrected  by  effective  regulation  and  oversight.  But  farmers  also  face  other
fluctuating  costs,  arising  from  weddings,  funerals  and  other  social  obligations;
new  state-related  costs,  such  as  fees,  taxes,  and  bribes;  natural  disasters  such  as
droughts;  and  terms  of  trade  both  internationally  and  with  urban  areas  that
often  decline  and  always  fluctuate.  All  of these  factors  reduce  farmers'  ability  to
plan  for  debt  payments,  especially  in  the  absence  of  rural  insurance  markets.
And  the  poor  peasants  most  at  risk  for  default  are  likely  to  be  excluded  from
tontines and other  informal  lending  and  savings  schemes. 7

Moreover,  during the  long  period of reform  and tiding,  the  several  competing
systems  of  tenure  are  likely  to  increase  confusion  and  conflict  and  actually
decrease  tenure  security.' 8  The  liberal  critiques  also  often  aggregate  the  negative
individual  effects  of numerous  systems, rather than  examining systems holistically,
individually  and  comparatively. 9

Thus,  in  the  absence  of  certain  social  and  historical  conditions,  the  market
may  fail  in  its  most  basic  function-the  efficient  allocation  of resources.  These
conditions  include  the predominance  of arm's-length  relationships,  both  among
parties  and  between  parties  and  the  things  contracted  for;  the  establishment  of
universal  and  objective professional  standards  and procedural norms;  functioning
free markets for other inputs and outputs; and the relative  autonomy of institutions
such  as  the market  and various  state  actors. Many  of these  conditions  clearly  do
not prevail  in  many  African  countries. 20

Tenure  security

The economists'  focus  on  tenure  security is not  entirely misplaced,  as a number
of forces  may  threaten  small  farmers'  security.  But  the insecurity  of land  tenure
in  traditional  systems  and  its  detrimental  effects  are  probably  both  overstated.
The frequent  shifts  in land  usage  in  pre-colonial  tenure  systems  occurred  largely
because  of  the  abundance  of  land,  not  because  of  insecure  tenure.  Many
communal systems guarantee  usage  rights on  the  condition of continued  farming,
providing  security  approximating  that  of freehold  title.  And  some  measures  to
enhance  productivity,  such  as  fertilizers,  pesticides,  new  strains  of annual  crops
and  certain  farming  techniques,  do  not  require  tenure  security,  as  they  are  not
long-term  investments  specific  to  a  piece  of land.2'

16 Platteau,  op. cit.,  n.  8, 206-216;  Caverivire  and  Db~ne, op.  cit.,  n.  3, 300-301.
'7  Platteau,  op. cit.,  n.  8, 198-204.
"'  Cheikhou I.  Sylla, Etude de la cuvette  de Cascas: Aspectsfonciers des aminagements hydro-agricoles, Working

Paper  029,  St.  Louis,  Senegal,  1989,  2, 26;  Platteau,  op.  cit.,  n.  8,  148-152.

19  Platteau,  op. cit.,  n.  8,  122-123;  Bruce, op.  cit.,  n.  11,  24.
20 Platteau,  op. cit.,  n.  8,  233.
21  Ibid.,  134;  Van  den Brink  and Bromley,  op.  cit.,  n.  2,  7-9.

Growing Secunty

[ 1999] J.A.L.

There  are  nevertheless  some  reasons  to  fear  tenure  insecurity.  Governments
seek  land  to  lease  to  agribusinesses  and  resort  operators  or  to  expropriate  for
public  purposes,  such  as  the conservation  of environmental  resources.2  When  a
household  expands  and  needs  additional  lands,  it  can  obtain  more  via  chiefly
fiat  or moral  obligation to  family. Similarly,  bmigris, primarily  "sons  of the village"
who  live  in  African  or northern  cities,  often  request  large  parcels  for prestige  or
investment.  Village  authorities  rarely  reject  such  requests  because  these  nigrs
remit wages  and  have  ties  to  urban  and northern  society. 23

Leaving  land  fallow  can  also  threaten  a  landholder's  tenure  security.  As
demand  for  arable  land  increases,  fallow  periods  decline  and  the land's  fertility
degrades.  Even  with  fertilizers  or  new  techniques  or  crop  strains,  land  must  lie
fallow  for  a  time;  this  choice  not  to  farm  land  is  a  form  of investment,  but  one
which  must  be  secured  by  reliable  tenure.  Users  must  introduce  inputs  and
techniques  to  keep  pace  with  increases  in  population  and  in  demand  for  land
and  crops.  But  firm  security  of  tenure  is  important  even  with  shortened  fallow
periods  if land's long-term fertility is to be conserved by making such investments.24
Tenure  security  is  vital  because  of the  three  types  of costs  that  landholders
and  users  incur  in  its  absence.  First,  landholders,  users  and potential  buyers  of
land  with  insecure  tenure  or  unclear  tide  forgo  investment  in  acquisitions  or
improvements,  such  as  planting  tree  crops  or  constructing  roads  or  irrigation
works,  incurring  opportunity  costs.  In  turn,  the  forgoing  of investment  checks
the  accumulation  of productive  capital.2"  The  lack  of formal  rural  credit  makes
capital  formation  all  the more  important, especially where  it can  be  accumulated
and used  through  savings  associations.

Conversely,  current landholders  and users may try to minimize  their insecurity
by  altering  their  own  investments  or  those  of  tenants.  Landholders  may forbid
otherwise  efficient  practices  on  loaned  and  leased  land,  including  perhaps
construction  or  tree-planting  by  tenants,  fearing  that  these  might  strengthen
tenants'  claims  to  the  land.  Permanent  improvements  to  land  may  themselves
be  unproductive  and  made  only  to  improve  security.  Pastoralists  and  urban
entrepreneurs  who  are  inexperienced  at  agriculture  may  take  it  up  seeking  to
secure  claims  to  land  for  pasture,  prestige  or  asset diversification.  In  all  of  these
cases,  landholders  and users  are  trying to  ensure  tenure  security  using  ways  that
do  not  maximize  the  land's  output.26

Thirdly,  litigation  costs  mount  due  to  conflicting  traditional  and  modem
claims,  unclear  boundaries  between  holdings,  government  takings  and  frequent
conflicts  between  agriculturalists  and  pastoralists.27  And  there  is  also  a  fourth

22  Platteau,  op.  cit.,  n.  8,  152;  Caverivi~re  and  Db6ne,  op.  cit.,  n.  3,  71.  Justifications  of the

latter  type  may  mask  rent-seeking  behaviour  of the  former.

23 Platteau,  op.  cit.,  n.  8,  170-174;  Bruce,  op.  cit.,  n.  11,  28.
24 Bruce,  op.  cit.,  n.  11,  28;  Cleaver  and  Schreiber,  op.  cit.,  n.  6,  201.
25  Platteau,  op.  cit.,  n.  8,  163-167.
2,  Ibid.,  167-70;  Bruce,  op.  cit.,  n.  11,  29.
27  Economic  changes  exacerbate  these  conflicts.  Irrigation  has  allowed  crops  to  be  grown  on
greater  areas  over  more  of the  year,  closing  off  access  to  both  land  and  water  for  pastoralists.
Conversely,  wells  in  the  rain-fed  highlands have  increased  the  areas where  herds can  graze,  reducing
the  formerly  abundant  rain-fed  (i.e.,  non-irrigable)  land  usable  by low-caste  growers.  Paul  Mathieu,
Madiodio  Niasse  and Pierre-Pol  Vinck6,  "Am~nagements  hydro-agricoles, concurrence  pour  l'espace
et  pratiques  fonci~res  locales  dans  la  vallee  du fleuve  S~n~gal:  Le  cas  de  la zone  du  Lac de  Guiers",
in  Crousse,  Le  Bris  and  LeRoy  (eds.),  Espaces disputes  en  Afrique  noire: pratiques, foncres locales,  Paris,
1986,  226-227  and  233.  The  likelihood of such  conflicts  is  increased  where  the  state  explicitly  seeks
to  "sedentarize"  herders  and where  land  laws  require  residency  on the  land in  order to  secure  usage
rights.

Vol.  43,  No.  I

Growing  Security

cost,  borne  by  the  entire  economy:  the  downward  effect  of insecurity  on  a plot
of  land's  price  may  be  exacerbated  where  the  sale  occurs  in  a  black  market
where  sales  are  officially  prohibited.  The  illegality  of the  transaction  may  itself
further  increase  the  risk  premium,  depressing  the  land's  price  to  less  than  its
productive  value.

A residence  requirement protects  landholders  or users from  the  nzgrds, though
not from  the  pressures  of expanding  high-status  households. But the  bnigris' value
to  the  community  makes  enforcement  of such  a requirement  difficult  and  rare.2"
Rather, clearer statements  and  enforcement  of traditional  rules  that protect those
actually using the land appropriately increase  tenure  security.29 Under-investment
may  still  result  where  traditional  systems  or  state  laws  prevent  the  free  sale  of
land,  which would  allow complete  compensation  for investments,  in  comparison
to  the  institutionally  different  model  of free  exchange  of land.

Evidence  suggests  that  land  rights  per se  affect  agricultural  practices  less  than
the  overall  framework  of incentives,  including  prices  for  crops,  and  for  inputs
such  as  fertilizers,  seed  and  capital.  Land  of  higher  value  in  a  given  market
structure  thus  provides  a  greater  incentive  for  investment."  Nevertheless,  the
various  rights  in  land  that  a  party  may  have-including  to  security,  alienability
and  compensation  for improvements-directly  affect price  and value.  The price
a  landholder  can  charge  and  a  farmer  will  pay  is  partly  an  expression  of  the
division  of rights  between  the  original  landholder  and the user  or buyer  that  the
agreement  confers,  explicitly  or  implicitly.  The  value  of  the  land  apart  from
these  rights-e.g., due to  factors such  as its fertility  and preceding  improvements,
or  the  scarcity  of  land  in  the  area-may  cause  that  farmer  to  seek  increased
security.  Cyclically,  that  increased  security  may  encourage  the  farmer  to  adopt
technologies  that  conserve  or  enhance  resource  yields.  Therefore,  farmers  may
implement  more  improvements  on  relatively  more  valuable  land,  and  security
alone  may  not  be  a  sufficient  condition  for  improvements  in  many  cases,  as
where  the  land  has  inherently  low  value.

In general,  the  inability  of the poor  to  incur  risks  ensures  that  many potential
conflicts  will  be  precluded  in  favour  of  the  higher-class  actor,  where  such  a
differential  exists.  Existing landholders'  defensive  attitudes  in  response  to  tenure
insecurity  also  tend to  restrict potential  tenants'  access  to land  and opportunities
for  investment  in  it.  Finally,  insecurities  and  conflicts  allow  elites  who  best
understand  both  the  conflicts  and  the  general  legal  and  political  system  or who
can  marshal  the  greatest  financial  and  state  resources  to  accumulate  land  for
themselves.3'

Farm size  and organization

Beyond  a  certain,  fairly  small  size,  there  is  an  inverse  relationship  between
land's  productivity  and  farm  size  in  developing  countries,  making  large-scale,
mechanized  agriculture  inefficient.32  A  small  family  farm  of  about  one  to  1.5
hectares  maximizes  productivity  in  capital-poor  economies.  Smaller  plots  are

28 Platteau,  op.  cit.,  n.  8, 170-174.
29 Heath,  op.  cit.,  n. 9, 40-41.
30  Ibid.,  35.
31 Platteau,  op.  cit.,  n. 8, 175-182;  see  also  Cleaver and  Schreiber,  op.  cit.,  n.  6, 204.
32  Heath,  op.  cit.,  n.  9, 47-48;  see  also,  R.  A.  Berry  and  W.  R.  Cline,  Agrarian Structure and

Productiviy in Developing Countries, Baltimore,  1979.

Growing  Security

[1999]  J.A.L.

inadequate  to  secure  the  farmer's  livelihood,  while  farms  larger  than  about  2
hectares  begin  to  see  returns  to  land  decline,  requiring  more  serious machinery,
and  raising  problems  of access  to  credit  or  costs  of labour.33

In  general,  capital  plays  a  small  role  in  this  development  because  revenues
may  not  cover  the  costs  of  machinery  or  capital-intensive  improvements  at
all,  given  often  overvalued  exchange  rates  and  low  world  prices  for  primary
commodities.  Labour  costs  are  typically  low  enough  that  it  is  not  profitable  to
substitute  capital  investments  for  labour.  Hence,  large-scale  agriculture  does  not
achieve  the  usual  economies  of scale.

Large  farms  must  pay  employees  to  farm  their  land,  while  smaller  farms  use
family  labour,  and  the  market  wage  usually  exceeds  the  opportunity  cost  of
family  labour,  as long as  agricultural  work does not completely  crowd out  family
labour's  household  work. 4  These  two  factors  in  combination  explain,  in  turn,
the  lower  use  of labour  by  large farms,  in  favour  of capital.  Also  contributing  to
the  lower  costs  of family  labour  are  the  lower disutility  of working  on one's  own
land;  gender  and  caste  restrictions  on  working  for  a  wage,  the  ease  of  co-
ordinating  household  and  agricultural  work  on one's  land,  and  a  risk  premium
attached  to  uncertain  employment  outside  the  family.35

A  second  series  of explanations  for  the  higher  productivity  of  smaller  farms
focuses  on  costs  such  as  labour  supervision,  vital  on  larger  farms  but  not  on
smaller  ones.  Large-scale  agriculture  requires  close  supervision  because  the
quality  of the work  affects  the product.  Moreover,  a piece-wage  system  in  cereal
culture  is  not  feasible;  under  the  more  common  time-wage  system,  employers
must  guard  against  theft  of inputs  and  shirking,  but  family  farms  resemble  the
piece-wage  model  in  their  incentives.  And  small  farmers  may  add  to  the
productivity  of the  land  if they exercise  exceptional  care  in  its  stewardship  and
have  close  knowledge  of its  physical  attributes.36

Share-cropping  solves  some  of  the  problems  facing  larger  landholders 

in
labour-abundant  societies,  by  simulating  the  incentives  of  small-scale  farming.
By  allowing  tenant  farmers  to  grow  crops  independently,  rather  than  as  wage-
earning  employees,  the  landholder  thus  reduces  supervision  costs.  With  many
share-croppers  and  without  having  to  pay  wages,  landholders  also  spread  the
risk  of poor harvests between  themselves  and their tenants. The lower supervision
to  engage  in  other  activities,  further
requirement  also  permits  landholders 
spreading  their risk.  Share-cropping  may also  compensate  for a lack  of available
credit  and  crop  insurance  facilities  for  the tenant  farmer,  since  payment  for  use
of  the  land  and  other  inputs  may  follow  the  harvest,  and  the  tenant  farmer
assumes  less  risk  than  in  a  fixed-rent  arrangement.3 7

Finally,  realizing  the  economic  advantages  of share-cropping  over  ownership
by  the  small  farmer  requires  a  competitive  market  for  land-such  that  large
landholders  could  obtain  rents  from  the  tenants  close  to  the  value  of the  land
as measured  by  its productivity-and  low  transactions  costs for  arranging leases.
As  noted,  however,  land  and  credit  markets  in  Africa  are  often  not  developed.

33  Caverivi~re  and  Db~ne, op.  cit.,  n.  3,  299-300.
34  "Family  labour"  presumably  includes  child  labour,  and  should  include  the  costs  of  forgoing
education.  In  addition,  women's  labour  has  a low  marginal  opportunity  cost  because  women  are
undercompensated  in  wage  labour  and  have their  home  labour  undervalued.

35  Platteau,  op.  cit.,  n.  8,  51-55.
36  Ibid.,  56-58.
37  Ibid.,  61-63.

Vol.  43,  No.  I

Growing Security

Fixed-rent  small  tenant  farming  therefore  provides  the  strongest  work  incentive,
since  all  marginal  product  above  the  rent accrues  to  the  tenant.

To  counteract  the  productivity  disincentives  of share-cropping  compared  to
fixed-rent  tenancy,  the  landholders  must  closely  monitor  the  tenants  to  ensure
that  the  tenants  use  labour  and  other  inputs  optimally-and  the  costs  of such
supervision  may  wipe  out  the  gains  from  it.  Since  it is  rare  for  this  condition  to
be fulfilled,  "total production would increase  and transaction  costs would decrease
if land could be redistributed  in such  a way as  to allow  only owner-cultivation".38
It may  be  that,  rather than  small  family farms  or  large  agribusiness  holdings,
co-operatives  of  small  farmers  might  provide  the  greatest  efficiency."  Small
private  co-operatives,  often  organized  around  traditional  institutions,  have faced
few  efficiency  problems  and  have  treated  members  of different  classes  or  castes
with  remarkable  equality.4"  Such  co-operatives  present  numerous  advantages,
compared  to  a  system  predominantly  comprised  of small,  private  landowners:
administering  land is  cheaper  and  easier,  since  there  are  fewer  landholders.  Co-
operatives  allow greater flexibility in patterns of land use  with minimal transactions
costs,  thus  diversifying  farmers'  risk, especially  if their land  is in  various  climatic
and  soil  zones.  And members  may share  some  expensive  resources  such  as  farm
machinery."

Deeper  integration,  encompassing  labour  and  land  resources,  allows  the  co-
to  achieve  economies  of  scale  on  labour-intensive  tasks,  such  as
operative 
monitoring and guarding.  Pooling of resources  also allows  efficient  specialization,
including  in  management  tasks,  without  the  usual  increase  in risk  or  supervision
costs.  Finally, teamwork  may  have  a  morale-boosting  effect,  especially  when  the
tasks  are  demanding  or  repetitive.  Only  a  limited  degree  of  fragmentation  is
possible,  however,  if the  co-operative  is  to  remain  manageable  and efficient,  and
to  realize  some  of  these  economies.  The  inefficiencies  of  land  fragmentation,
and  the  problem  of incentive  dilution  cut  against large  co-operatives,  especially
where  production is not homogeneous, but depends  on the quality of the  labour.42
Nevertheless,  the closer relationship  of workers to both the means of production
and  managerial  decisions  may  produce  various  incentives  to  refrain  from  un-
productive  behaviour.  Social  norms  emphasizing  discipline  and  cohesion  and
recurring  interaction  all  protect  incentives.  The  penetration  of capitalist  modes
of production  and  exchange,  with  their  arm's-length,  monetized  relations,  may
erode  some  of these  norms,  but after  the  initial  period  of formation,  personal  trust,
and  norms  and  understandings  internal  to  the  grouping  are  likely  to  be  self-
sustaining. Finally,  these hazards  are only greater  than  those  on small, private  farms
using  family  labour;  there  are  clearly  greater  incentives  to  refrain  from  such
behaviour as a member of a co-operative  than  as an  employee of a large landholder.43

38 Ibid.,  67.
"  These  must  be  genuine co-operatives,  not  top-down  imitations  where  the  state  controls  the  co-
operative.  Certain  Senegalese  parastatals  sought  to  create  farming  co-operatives,  but  treated  the
farmers  as  labourers  rather  than  as  autonomous  entrepreneurs,  and  so  faced  the  employer's  usual
costs,  including labour  shirking,  asset  mismanagement,  pilfering  and  underreporting  of output.

40 Platteau,  op.  cit.,  n.  8,  247-252;  Madiodio  Niasse,  Les  acteursfonciers de  l'apris-barrage (rive gauche
dufleuve  Snzigal): Pesanteurs, tensions, tendances, unpublished  dissertation,  Universit  Cheikh  Anta  Diop-
Dakar,  1989,  93-94.

4'  Platteau,  op.  cit.,  n.  8,  253-271.
42 Ibid.,  253-271,  276-278.
43 Ibid.,  282-289.

C7owing Securi.0

[ 1999] J.A.L.

Technological  inputs and productivity

Use of capital-intensive  technology-especially  chemical fertilizers,  agricultural
machinery and enhanced crop strains-in developing country agriculture  appears
to  bring the  productivity  of large  farms  closer  to  that of small  farms.'  But small
farmers  tend  not  to  use  such  inputs  because  they  are  available  only  to  those
with  extensive  cash  or  credit  resources.  Large  landholders  are  more  likely  to
have  the  education,  government  contacts  and  resources  to  be  both  aware  of
these  inputs and able to take  advantage  of them.  Large farmers  do have  a natural
advantage  in their  capacity to take  risks  on new  technologies,  given  their superior
access  to  credit  and  more  diversified  holdings,  and  to  take  advantage  of  scale
economies.

4 5

The  levelling  of access  to  these  inputs  for  farmers  with  holdings  of all  sizes
may  be  fiscally  unfeasible,  as  it  would  require  significant  subsidies  to  small
farmers.  And  the  feasibility  of developing  either  a  market  for  hiring  expensive,
indivisible  resources  to  small  farmers,  or  institutions  such  as  co-operatives  for
joint  use  of these  resources  has  not  been  conclusively  demonstrated.'  Most  of
these  inputs,  besides  machinery,  tend  inherently  to  raise  crop  yields.  The  use
of machinery  does  not  necessarily  increase  productivity  over  labour-intensive
practices,  but  it  does  replace  labour,  decreasing  supervision  costs  and  reliance
on  more  labour-intensive  forms  of production.  If the  land  market  were  com-
petitive,  those  with  greater  marginal  productivity-i.e.,  small  farmers-would
simply  purchase  land  from  the  larger  farmers,  but such  markets  rarely  exist  in
sub-Saharan  Africa.

There  are  clearly  certain  inefficiencies  that  arise  from restrictions  on the  free
exchange  of land,  but  the  liberal  economic  perspective  probably  overestimates
both  these  inefficiencies  and the  possibility  for a privatization  and  tiding scheme
to  correct  them. For example,  efficient  multiple-use  practices  may  restrict a user
from  capital-intensive,  multiple-season  farming.  Even  without  such  restrictions,
an  entrepreneur  running a  large  farm  would  probably  incur  high  supervision
costs  and  low  labour  productivity  compared  to  a  share-cropping  system  with
better incentives. As  a result, the  entrepreneur might substitute  capital investments
for  labour,  despite  low  wages.  Unfamiliarity  with  the  land  and  multiple-use
farming  might  make  the  entrepreneur  a  poor  land  manager;  and  unfamiliarity
with  the  community  might cause  him to  make  costly errors ofjudgement.  Thus,
the  baseline  of  the  profit-maximizing  capitalist  is  not  an  appropriate  one  for
measuring  the  relative  costs  of traditional  land  rights.

Similarly,  the  inefficiencies  of a tenure  system of the  commons,  of open  access
to  land,  are  well  documented:  no  user  has  incentives  to  improve  the  land,  or
even  to  ensure  the  maintenance  of  its  long-term  productivity.  Advocates  of
property  rights  suggest  that  individual  titles  will  improve  tenure  security  and
encourage  both  sustainable  stewardship  and  investment.  But traditional  systems
do  provide  tenure  security,  especially where  land is  scarce  and  the user  farms  it
continually.  Strong  traditional  institutions  can  prevent  overuse  and  abuse  of the
commons  through  censure  or  punishment.  Finally,  tenure  security  is  not  a

Ibid.,  126-127.

-
45  Ibid.,  68-70.
46 Ibid.

Vol.  43,  No.  I

Growing Securit

sufficient  condition  for  investment  in  the  land,  especially  where  the  land's
marginal  productivity  is  inherently  low.

Moreover,  the process  of titling  presents  opportunities  for costly  rent seeking,
and  to  make  land  freely  alienable  would  disrupt  social  institutions  centring  on
land.  Changing  these  social  institutions  could  conceivably  improve  equity  and
tenure  security,  but a  titling  scheme  is  unlikely  to  produce  this  result,  given  the
privileged  access  of  elites  to  the  state  apparatus,  and  the  prevalence  of  rent-
seeking  behaviour  during  titling  programmes.

Property  rights  advocates  nevertheless  insist  that  if African  countries  could
create  a free  market  for  their land-i.e.,  devise  a  tidling  scheme  mostly  immune
from  rent-seeking  behaviour  and  profound  inequalities4 7-the 
resulting  land
market  would resolve  the  inefficiencies  described  above.  The  emergence  of this
market  should even  spur  the  development  of rural  credit  and insurance  markets,
enabling investments and specialization, with transactional  risk-spreading  through
insurance,  rather  than  production  risk-spreading.  But  non-productive  functions
of land  are  likely  to  distort  the  market  for land.  Creditors  might  have  excessive
leverage  over  vulnerable  borrowers,  such  as  small  farmers.  And  the  insurance
market  is unlikely  to extend  to rural  areas  of countries  that have underdeveloped
financial  services  in  their  major  cities.

Any  scheme  seeking  to  increase  the  control  of the  small  farmer  over  his  land
will  involve  some  form  of  official  allocation  or  recognition  of  existing  use  and
rights  that  will  be  susceptible  to  rent  seeking.  Co-operatives  in  many  situations
are  now  comprised  of small  farmers  with  only  usage  rights  to  their  land;  even
where  the  traditional or modem regimes ensure  that these  use rights are  relatively
secure,  some  remaining  insecurity  may  result  in  under-investment.  They  would
thus  arguably benefit  from  having  freehold  title  to  the  land.

LAND  TENURE  IN  THE  FUUTA  ToORO

The  current  state  of  land  law,  rights,  tenure  and  policy  in  Senegal  has
numerous  actors,  and  as  many  meanings.  The  wording  of the  law  on  land  is
indefinite.  Understanding  land  tenure  requires  an  examination  of  the  im-
plementation  of the  law  by  the  responsible  bodies-here,  municipalities.  In  the
study  region,  land  tenure  relationships  still  involve  traditional  social  relations
centring  on  land.  Traditional  elites  continue  to  enjoy legitimacy,  popularity  and
electoral  power,  and  can  therefore  sustain,  represent  and defend  these  customs.
National  policies  relating  to  land  use,  land  rights,  farming  and  other  natural
resources,  also  affect  land  tenure  relationships,  as  do  other  forms  of social  and
economic  change.

A  gift  to the  Senegalese  nation: the Loi  relative  au Domaine  National

The  Loi  relative  au Domaine National'  (LDN) sought  to  forge  a  middle  path
between  "selfish  individual  ownership  and  levelling  collectivism",  typical  of the
"third  way",  the  "African  socialism"  that  President  Senghor  proclaimed  for
Senegal.  Senghor  believed  that the  relations  between  traditional  elites and  tenant
farmers  were  socially  retrograde  and caused  land  degradation.  Hence,  the  LDN

4' See,  for example,  that  suggested  by  Platteau,  in  ibid.,  218.
4  Loi No.  64-46, relative au Domaine National (1964).

Growing Security

[1999]  J.A.L.

aimed  to  suppress  the  powers  of  traditional  landholders  in  favour  of  current
tenants.49  The  law  declared  all  land  not  already  privately  owned  to  be  the
Domaine National, the  property  of  the  Senegalese  nation,  covering  over  95  per
cent  of the  country's  land  area.  Thereafter,  no  private  actor  could  take  title  to
lands  from  the  Domaine  National. Most  of  the  unregistered  rural  areas  were
designated  zones  du  terroir, or  village  land  zones. 50

The  LDN's  framers  imagined  that  decentralized  associations  of  cultivators
would  administer  the  village  lands,  but  in  the  absence  of administrative  efforts
supporting such co-operatives,  these did not appear on their own.  The government
then  created  municipal  units5'  to  administer  the  land,  among  other  local  gov-
ernmental  responsibilities;  these  have  been  integrated  into  Senegal's  national
political-administrative  structure  and  are  largely  dominated  by  the  ruling  Parti
socialiste (PS).

The  reforms  grouped  small  numbers  of villages  into  Rural  Communities
(Communauts  rurales),  each  of  which  is  governed  by  a  Rural  Council  (Conseil
rual). The  community  elects  two-thirds  of the  Rural  Council's  members,  while
representatives  of local  agricultural  co-operatives  comprise  the  remaining  third.
These  Rural  Councils  "affect"  (i.e.,  allocate),  land  to  parties,  who  then  become
the  affectaires  of  the  land;  the  councils  thus  take  on  the  role  of  traditional
land  authorities.  The  council  elects  its  president  and  vice-president  internally.
Traditional  village  chiefs,  presidents  of  co-operatives  and  councillors  whose
primary work is not rural-often  urban elites who hail from the Rural Community
and  have  family there-are  not eligible  for the presidency  and  vice-presidency.5 2
But  these  exclusions  are  of  marginal  relevance  to  land  allocations,  since  the
whole  council  votes  on  them;53  the  structure  ensures  that  elites  on  the  council
can  limit  the  council's  encroachment  on  the  role  of traditional  authorities.  The
council's  power to affect  land to non-familial  groupings has  allowed  co-operatives
to  allocate  lands  internally,  but  only  as  long  as  they  comply  with  the  local  PS
authorities.

Thus, the  LDN  did  not  seek  to  effect  a massive  redistribution  of existing  land
occupation;  rather,  it  recognizes  the  tenure  of  those  using  the  land.  But  if the
law  were  fully  implemented  according  to  its  original  intent,  there  would  be  a
massive  change  in  land  rights,  since  traditional  landholders  would  lose  their
powers.  The  law  then  presumes  that  the  tenure  it  grants  will  be  passed  down
within  families,  though  it makes  no  formal  provision  for  this  inheritance.54  The
councils  may  also  affect  unused  land  to  new  users,  or  "disaffect"  (divest) land
from  affectaires who  are  not  using  it.  The  councils'  decisions  of affectation  are  to
be  based  on  the  capacity  of the  applicants,  individual  or  corporate,  for personal
use  and  mise  en  valeur-i.e., putting  the  land  to  valuable  use  as  an  economically

49  Caverivire  and  Dbne, op.  cit.,  3,  71,  225;  Sylla, op.  cit.,  n.  18,  46.
50  Caveriviere  and  Dtbne, op.  cit.,  n.  3,  226-227;  Platteau,  op.  cit.,  n.  8,  154-155.
5'  Loi No.  72-25, 19 juin  1972, sur la rtfome  de  I'administration territriae.
52 Platteau,  op. cit.,  n.  8,  154,  158-159;  "Les  prerogatives  du  Conseil  rural",  (21  June,  1990)  Le
Soleil  3;  Sylla,  op.  cit.,  n.  18,  46-47.  The  Rural  Communities  are  often  miles  apart,  and  their
residents  often do not  know each  other.  The  Rural  Councils also lack  administrative  resources,  often
allowing  traditional,  village-level  authorities  to wield greater  influence  than  the  councils.  Caverivire
and  Db  ne,  op.  cit.,  n.  3,  189-190.

53 Loi No. 80-14, 3juin 1980, sur la modication de  I'administration territoriale, cited  in  Caverivi~re  and
Dbne, op.  cit.,  n.  3,  178.  These  decisions  must  then  be  approved  by  the  sub-prefect,  per  a  1986
decree.  Dicret No.  86-445, lOjuin  1986, cited  in ibid.,  186.

-

"Les  enjeux  fonciers  dans  le  Delta:  Les  obstacles  A la  r~forme",  (21  June,  1990)  Le  Solil 2;

Caverivi~re  and  D~b~ne,  op. cit.,  n.  3,  73,  207.

Vol.  43,  No.  t

Growing Security

and  physically  productive  resource.  Only  members  of  the  community  may  be
affectaires, thus  in  principle  preventing  outside  entrepreneurs  from  accumulating
land  at  the  expense  of locals. 5

The government  established  the  bodies authorized  by  the  1972  reforms  slowly,
reaching  the  St.  Louis  region,  which  contains  the  study  area,  only  in  1980.56
The slowness  of this  implementation  added to  the confusion  over tenure  security,
with no organ to administer  the LDN and decide  land disputes in the meantime.57
In  this  vacuum  of national  support  for  the  LDN's  implementation,  many  local
governments  continued  to  accede  explicitly  to  traditional  authorities,  claiming
to be unaware of the  LDN. Traditional  authorities thus maintained their capacities
in  land  allocation  unopposed  throughout  the  1970s.Y'

The  government  explicitly  foresaw  the  likelihood  of  resistance  by  traditional
authorities  as  it contemplated  implementation  of the  law."  It was  aware  of both
the  need  for  the  dissemination  of  information  on  the  LDN  to  rural  areas,  and
the  underfunding of the complementary  agricultural  extension  offices,  the  Centres
d'expansion rurale polyvalents  (CERPs).  The  1972  reforms  sought  to  address  these
deficiencies.  But almost  20  years  after  the  creation  of the  Rural  Councils  in  the
St.  Louis  Region,  councillors  still  claim  an  incomplete  acquaintance  with  the
mandate  and  details  of the  LDN  and  even  with  the  territorial  limits  of their
jurisdiction,  leading  to conflicts  between councils.60  Rural  Councils  lack  capacity
largely because  they have  few  resources.  They have  no  funding for a  secretariat,
or  for  remuneration  of  their  members;  very  few  councils  maintain  a  central
registry  of affectations.  The  CERPs,  which  might aid  the  councils  in  matters  of
land  affectation,  also  remain  "sadly  underfunded".6'

The  1972  laws  provided  that  councils  could  affect  and  disaffect  land  because
of insufficient  productive  use  ("pour insuffsance de mise  en  valeur"), because  of poor
land  management,  or because  neither  the affectaire nor  his  family  was  exploiting
the  land  personally.  If  the  council  finds  one  of these  violations,  it  may  put  the
affectaire on probation;  if the  affectaire does  not remedy  the situation  within  a year,
the  council  may  disaffect. 62  But  the  law's  acceptance  of  corporate  parties  as

11 Caverivi~re  and Dbne, op. cit.,  n.  3,  73,  201;  Platteau,  op. cit.,  n.  8,  154-157.
56 Dicret No.  80-085,  29 janvier 1980, sur  l'entrie en  vigueur  de  la  Loi  72-25 dans  [a  Rigion  du 

leuve,

"Les  enjeux  fonciers  dans  le  Delta", op.  cit.,  n.  54.

5'  Mamadou  Niang, "La  rtforme de  l'administration  territoriale  et locale  au  Stn~gal",  (1981)  172

Notes  Africaines  106.

58 See,  for example,  Malal N'Diaye, "Apropos du Domaine  National:  Le Toucouleur,  la  coeltume,
et la loi",  (20 August,  1976)  Le Soleil  8.  N'Diaye,  an  adjunct  to  the  prefect  of Podor  Department,  in
the  St.  Louis  Region,  believed  that  this  ignorance  was  wilful  and  protected  the  privileges  of  the
religious  authorities,  who  convinced  the lower  castes  that  to  contest  traditional  land  allocations  was
a  sin.  A  response  defended  the  local  system  as  fair  and  maintained  that  the  positions  of traditional
authority  were  open  to all  members  of a  clan,  not  inherited.  D.  W.  Massy,  "A propos  du  Domain
National:  Un  Toucouleur  rtpond",  (1 September,  1976)  Le  Soleil 9.

59 Ministre  du  Plan  et  du  Dtveloppement,  Synthise des  rapports du  shminaire des cadres intermidiaires

(1965) relative au Domaine National, Dakar,  1965,  5;  see  also  Minist~re  du Plan  et du  D~veloppement,
Prblimes et programmes d'application de  la  Loi  no.  64-46  relative  au  Domaine National, Dakar,  1966,  12;
Ministere  du  Plan et du Developpement,  Commission interministielle d'itude de l'application de la Loi relative
au  Domaine National, Dakar,  1967;  Secretariat  d'Etat  auprts  du  Premier  Ministre  charg6  du  Plan,
Communication en conseil  intenninistdriel sur le point actuel de l'application de la  loi  relative au Domaine National,
Dakar,  1971,  10-  1.  The  1966  report  suggested  various  methods  to  disseminate  the  details  of the
LDN  to  local  citizens  and administrators,  none  of which  was  widely  implemented.

60 "La  dilimitation,  solution  idoine",  (21  June,  1990) 

.e Soleil  3;  Mathieu,  Niasse,  and  Vinck6,

op. cit.,  n.  27,  235.

61 "Les  prerogatives  du  Conseil  rural",  op.  cit.,  n.  52;  Caveriviare  and  Db  ne,  op.  cit.,  n.  3,

194-195.

62  Caveriviere  and  Db  ne,  op. cit.,  n.  3,  202-203.

Growng Security

[1999]  J.A.L.

affectaires also  allows  traditional  family  groups  to  maintain  their  land  rights.  The
main  criterion  for  land  affectation,  the  notion of rnise en  valeur, has  also  not been
defined  adequately,  causing  administrative  inconsistencies.  The  Rural  Councils
thus have  sufficient latitude to maintain  traditional land tenure relations,  although
all  uses  of land  where  neither  the  affectaire nor  his  family  are  directly  exploiting
it,  such  as  share-cropping,  are  technically  illegal.6"

The law also leaves  loopholes  and lacunae.  It generally prohibits  disaffectation
of  land  that  a  family  has  been  farming,  but  allows  it  in  the  name  of "public
utility".64  Traditional  authorities  have  used  this  clause  to justify  affectations  to
their  families  of  land  already  in  use  by  other  parties.  The  requirement  that
affectation  applications  be  written  further  limits  the  possibility  for  members  of
low  castes  to  become  affectaires since  most  are  illiterate.65

The  law  does  provide  that,  if the  council  disaffects  land  from  one party  and
affects  it  to  another,  the  new  affectaire must  compensate  the  former  one  for
any  improvements  made.  Similarly,  disaffectation  for  public  utility  must  be
compensated  with  the  affectation  of  parcels  of  equal  value  elsewhere.  This
counterweight  is of limited  use, however,  in Rural Communities  with  a minimum
of  arable  land  remaining,  and  in  the  absence  of  a  mechanism  for  measuring  a
land's  value.6

Thus,  the  LDN  sought  to  strengthen  tenants'  and  users'  claims  to  continued
tenure  security.  However,  the weak  council presidency  has  ensured that  the elites
who  typically  populate  the  majority  of the  remaining  council  seats  control  it.
The  councils'  ineffectiveness  in  implementing  the  law's  intent  is  especially
unsurprising given that their mandate is unclear, especially the vague requirements
of  mise  en  valeur.  Furthermore,  the  councils  rarely  have  a  clear  sense  of  the
territorial  limits  of  their  jurisdiction,  and  lack  funding  to  support  their  ad-
ministration.  Finally,  there  is  no  effective  oversight  of  the  councils'  activities,
since  the  elected  elites  are  tied  to  the  prefecture  through  clientelist  networks,
especially  through  the  Socialist  Party.  As  a  result,  traditional  land  relations  still
prevail  in  many  parts  of Senegal.

Traditional land rights in the Fuuta Tooro  today

As  they  do  in  many  other  traditional  African  land  tenure  systems,  family
lineages  traditionally  control  land in  the  Fuuta  Tooro.  In one  type  of traditional
landholding,  the  diowre, the  landholding  family  is  that which  was  mythically  the
first  to  appropriate  the land  by  clearing  it  of brush.  The  diom leydi,  or  master  of
the  land,  is  the  head  of  the  lineage,  and  either  allocates  the  diowre  to  family
members  or  loans  it  to  the  family's  clients.  The  other  major  type  of traditional
landholding,  the  kedde  leydi,  is  a  form  of  leasehold,  usually  requiring  that  the
farmer  pay in advance  of the farming season for  the use.  These  in-kind payments,
the ndjoldi, are  calculated  as  a  share of the previous  year's  harvest.  Under  a rarer

63  Ibid.,  203-204,  307;  Platteau,  op. cit.,  n.  8, 154-157;  "Les prerogatives  du  Conseil rural",  op.

cit.,  n. 52.

64  Loi No.  64-46, op.  cit.,  art.  13;  D&ret No.  72-1288, 27 octobre 1972, sur la  riforme de l'adninistration

te'toriaL,  Caverivire  and  Dbne, op. cit.,  n.  3,  204.

65 Caverivi~re  and  Db~ne, op.  cit.,  n.  3,  71,  205,  236.
6  Ibid.,  206-207,  222. The  valuation  of land  is  especially  hard  to effect  and  review  in  the absence
of a  market  for  land.  Compensation for  capital  improvements  seems  less  problematic,  in theory:  the
former  affectaire  may at  least  claim  restitution  for  his  costs,  and  perhaps  for  the  expected  benefits  of
the  improvements.

Vol.  43,  No.  I

Growing Security

type of tenure,  called njimmaandi, the  lowest castes-the  alaaleydi, or landless-can
lease  land,  paying  a  share  of the  crop,  the  assakal, to  the  landholder  after  the
harvest, This  arrangement  is called  the  rem pethiem.  The  assakal is  usually a larger
proportion  of the  crops  than  is  the  ndjoldi.67

The  diom lydi are  usually  toorotobe, a caste of Islamic  Toucouleur cleric-warriors
that  revolted  against  the  then-ruling  caste,  the farba, in  1776;  the farba remain
an  elite landholding caste,  though they  lack the political authority  of the toorotobe.68
The  toorotobe  and  diom  leydi  still  occupy  positions  of  authority  in  Toucouleur
society,  both  as  traditional  authorities  and  through  more  modern  institutions
such  as  the  Rural  Councils.  Women  do  not traditionally  hold  land, although  a
woman  may  be  a  diom  leydi  or  a  tenant  if she  is  widowed  by  a  husband  who
held  one  of these  positions.  Recently,  however,  women  have  increasingly  taken
over  the  roles  of  controlling  land  use  and  farming  as  many  of  their  husbands
migrate  to  African  or Northern  cities.69

The  land  user,  usually  a  tenant  farmer,  also  enjoys  certain  rights.  The
landholder  may  not  re-appropriate  land  from  the  user,  as  long  as  the  user
continues  to  farm  or  sublet  the  land  and  to  pay  the  tribute.  Thus,  this  tenure
system  has  individualized  aspects,  and  is  not  a  pure  communal  tenure  system
autocratically  managed  by  the  diom  leydi.7°  These  rights  for  users  also  partly
explain  this caste  system's enduring legitimacy  among non-elites.  Share-cropping
arrangements,  recently  predominant  in  the  waalo-the  prestigious  and relatively
fertile  floodplains  of  the  Senegal  River  and  its  tributaries-are  thus  not  a  new
system.  These  old  share-cropping  arrangements  are,  however,  spreading to  new
castes,  increasingly  replacing labour tributes  from landless  farmers of slave castes.
Finally,  like  most  other  indigenous  African  land  tenure  systems,  this  is  a
multiple-use  system.  Specifically,  herders  traditionally have certain  transhumance
rights  of access  to  water  and to  crop  stubble  for  their herds  to graze;  in  return,
the  herds  fertilize  the  land.  These  various  users  may  come  into  conflict  when
one  of them,  usually the  agriculturalist, asserts  the full  panoply of rights  inherent
to  affectation.

Facts  on the  ground: operation  and implementation  by  the  Rural
Councils

The  national  government  has, 

to  some  extent,  pressured  traditional  and
modem  local  authorities  to  increase  access  to  fertile  lands  for low  castes.  In  the
traditional  system,  the  slave  castes  only  farmed  millet  and  sorghum  on  the
occasionally  rain-fed  dieri  highlands.  Now  some  are  farming  plots  in  both  the
intermediate  foonde  lands,  newly  cultivable  because  of  irrigation  by  farmers'
associations,  and  in  government-sponsored,  large  irrigated  perimeters  in  the
waalo floodplain.  Younger  farmers  have formed  new co-operatives.  The  drought
from  around  1980  to  the  early  1990s,  the  latest  period  in  a  gradual,  century-
long decline in rainfall  that has relented in recent years,7'  and the disengagement
of the  state  seem  to  have  engendered  solidarity  and  co-operation  among  low-

67 Sylla,  op.  cit.,  n.  18,  22-24;  Niasse,  op.  cit.,  n.  40,  167-170.
68 Niasse,  op. cit.,  n. 40,  167-168.
69 Sylla,  op. cit.,  n.  18,  32-33,  53.
76 Niasse,  op.  cit.,  n. 40,  168-169.
71 Platteau,  op.  cit.,  n.  8,  175-178;  interview  with Albert  Sagna  (Director, Centre d'expansion rurale
polyvalent, N'dioum)  and Mary  Liakos  (Volunteer, Peace  Corps,  Kahel),  in  N'dioum,  23 June,  1996;
Niasse,  op. cit.,  n.  40,  32-36.

52 

Growing Securiy 

[1999]  J.A.L.

caste  youth,  unlike  the  shorter  drought  in  the  early  1970s,  when  the  state  was
still  able to borrow and  spend heavily on  parastatals. Farmers also  resist becoming
employees  of large  farms,  which  they  fear  would  transform  them  into  a  rural
working  class.72

Still,  this  result  is  unusual,  since  in  Senegal,  as  elsewhere  in Africa,  the trend
has  been  one  of symbiosis  between  the  dominant  Socialist  Party  (PS) and  the
local  elites;  the  PS,  through  the regional  prefect's  office,  can  directly  control  the
Rural  Councils'  decisions  on  land  affectation.73  The  LDN  also  aids  in  the
patronage  scheme;  its rationality,  requiring  affectaires to  have the  capacity  for mise
en  valeur, allows  the  councils  to  allocate  land  to  those  who  can  invest  in  it.  In
many  cases,  small  farmers  have  had  land  affected  to  them  only  because  the
subsidies  and  loans  of the  state  have  provided  them  with  the  capacity  for  mise
en  valeur.74

In  other cases,  poor farmers  exaggerate  their capacity for mise en valeur in order
to  ensure  that  they  meet  the hazy  criteria,  and  their  subsequent  use  of the  land
does  not  match  the  claims.  Rural  Councils  do  not  have  the  means  to  establish
and maintain a formal mechanism  for review  of applicants'  capacities.  Moreover,
the  lower-caste  tenant  farmer  is  rarely  the  applicant  best  able  to  realize  the
land's  mise en  valeur. This  effect  often  conflicts  with  the  law's  original  purpose  of
maintaining  tenure  security  for those  actually  working  the  land.75

The  requirement  that  affectaires be  members  of the  Rural  Community  should
limit  the  Council's  power  to  make  affectations  to  entrepreneurial  outsiders  at
the  expense  of current  farmers,  though  it  also  prevents  outsiders  from  farming
lands  that  have  lain fallow  for decades,  held by traditional  elites  as  a secure  asset
or for prestige.  In  these  instances,  urban entrepreneurs  may  be  better positioned
than  local  small  farmers  to  persuade  Rural  Councils  to  loosen  traditional  elites'
hold  on  the  fallow  land.76

Some  Rural  Councils  have  also  organized  Commissions  domaniales, which  seek
accurately  to  delimit  landholdings  with  the  assistance  of  the  CERPs  and  to
determine  which  lands  are  currently  occupied  and in  use. 7  These  commissions
intend  to  improve  those  land  registries  that  do  exist,  which  are  usually  poorly
maintained  and  inaccurate,  causing  conflicts  over  boundaries.  Some  CERPs
have  sought  to  improve  the  registries  independently  of the  councils,  but  have
been  rebuffed.  Few councils  have  created  these  Commissions domaniales, and  almost
none  have  used  their findings  to  disaffect  current  affectaires from  land  they  were
not using, despite  occasional  requests  from potential  farmers.78  On the contrary,
where  traditional  village  chiefs  have  led  the commissions,  they have  ensured  that

72 Platteau,  op.  cit.,  n.  8,  178-179;  interview  with  Sagna  and  Liakos,  op.  cit.,  n.  71;  Caverivi~re
and  Db~ne,  op.  cit.,  n.  3,  290;  Niasse,  op.  cit.,  n.  40,  92.  Government  officials  are  still  biased  in
favour of leasing  large tracts to agribusiness  in  the  name of efficiency  and jobs for the  rural population.
Cheikh  Thiam,  "Am6nagement  et  allocation  des  terres",  (15  November,  1993) Le  Sole'l  9,  quoting
Alioune  Thioub  Samb,  agricultural  engineer,  SAED-Bakel.

"  Decree  No.  86-445,  of  10 June,  1986,  requires  that  the prefect  approve  all  council  decisions

reaarding  land.

4  Interview  with  Sagna  and  Liakos,  op. cit.,  n.  71;  Caverivirre  and  Db~ne,  op.  cit.,  n.  3,  186.
75  Interview  with  Sagna  and  Liakos,  op.  cit.,  n.  7 1;  Caverivi~re  and  D36b~ne,  op.,  cit.,  n.  3,  22 1,
295;  Platteau,  op. cit.,  n. 8,  179-182;  Sylla,  op. cit.,  n.  18,  41;  Mathieu,  Niasse  and  Vinck  , op. cit.,
n.  27,  230-231,  236.

76  Caverivire  and  Db6ne,  op.  cit.,  n.  3,  298-307.
77  Article  25  of Law  No.  72-25  authorized  the  councils  to  form  these  bodies.
78  Interview  with  Sagna  and  Liakos,  op.  cit.,  n.  71.

Vol. 43,  No.  I

Growing Securi y

affectations  to  low-caste  farmers  did  not  trample  any  traditional  landholders'
interests.79

In  the  few  cases  where  some  councillors  have  attempted  to  disaffect  the land
from  traditional  elites  who  were  not  using  it  and  reaffect  it  to  lower-caste
applicants,  conflicts  have  crippled  the  councils;  some  have  found  that  they  can
only  operate  if they  refuse  to  hear  any questions  regarding  land  affectations.  In
other  instances,  the  conflicts  have  led to  violence  between councillors  of different
castes, occasionally requiring police intervention. In general, however, the councils
have  not interfered  with  land allocations  by  traditional  elites,  because  local elites
often  control  the  councils. 0

On  the  other  hand,  councils  have  occasionally  affected  land  to  a  traditional
landholder  who  wanted  to  reclaim  it  from  a  current  tenant;  this  action  directly
violates  the guiding  principles  of the LDN which  intend for  the users  of the  land
to  be  the  affectaires. In  one  instance,  a  landholder  threatened  to  seek  affectation
of  land  traditionally  belonging  to  his  family,  although  the  tenant  had  farmed  it
and  paid  the  ndoldi for  years,  as  had  his  father  before  him.  The  sub-prefect
refused  to  approve  the  affectation  to  the  landholder,  rather  than  to  the  user,
and  the  farmer  stopped  paying  the  ndjoldi. At  harvest  time,  the  landholder's
family tried  to  take  the  land, and  the  national gendarmerie had  to  intervene.  Such
disaffectations  from  low-caste  tenants  to  traditional  landholders  do  occur,  but
only somewhat  more  frequently  than  those  in  the  other  direction;  once  land  is
affected,  usually  to  a  landholder  but  occasionally  to  a  tenant,  disaffectation  of
any  kind is  unusual.8'

Still, the  threat of such disaffectations  is  real,  given  that traditional  leaders  are
often both  elected  councillors  and local  PS leaders,  thus consolidating  traditional
and  state  authority.  Although  the  minority  Patti denocratique socialiste (PDS) has
fielded  candidates  in  some  council  elections,  few  PDS  councillors  have  been
elected,  and  the  PDS  has  boycotted  a  number  of  elections  in  frustration  and
protest.82  When  conflicts  do  arise  on  the  councils,  different  factions  within  the
PS  often  find  themselves  in  opposition.  In  Mboumba,  the  national  Political
Bureau  of the  PS  recognized  a  minority  of PS  councillors-all  members  of the
traditional  elite-as  the  legitimate  Rural  Council;  the  other,  larger  faction  had
sought to  loosen  the  hold of the  traditional  authorities  on  the  council.  Following
this  incident,  the  Mboumba  Rural  Council  did  not  meet  for  over  five  years,
fearing  violence  among  its  members. 3

Finally, the councils  tend  to simply defer  to  traditional  authorities.  The  latters'
continued  strength  is  more pronounced  in  the  middle  Senegal  River  valley  than
in  other  parts of Senegal,  due  to  their religious  position  in  a  region  that has also
undergone  less  economic  change  than  others.84  The  requirement  that  one-third
of  the  councillors  be  representatives  of co-operatives  is  intended  to  dilute  the

79  Ibid;  Niang, op.  cit,  n.  57,  106;  "Les  enjeux  fonciers  dans  le  Delta",  op. cit.,  n.  54.
80  Sylla,  op.  cit.,  n.  18,  60.
81 Ibid.,  58,  66.
82  Interview  with  Sagna and  Liakos,  op.  cit.,  n.  71;  Caverivi  re  and  Db~ne, op.  cit.,  n.  3,  180;
Sylla,  op. cit.,  n.  18,  62. The  toorotobe  do not  always  rule  over  these  towns  in  a  cohesive,  unassailable
manner. In  Cascas,  a group  of toootobe  from different  parts  of the  village  attempted  an  agricultural
project,  but,  because  of their  equal  caste  standing,  none  could  assume  a  leadership  role  and  the
project was  abandoned.  See  Sylla,  op.  cit.,  n.  58.

'  Sylla,  op.  cit.,  n.  18,  48-51,  51-54,  62.
84  Ibid.,  48-51;  Interview  with  Sagna  and  Liakos,  op.  cit.,  n.  71;  Caveriviere  and  Dbne, op.

cit.,  n.  3,  180.

Growing Security

[1999]  J.A.L.

influence  of traditional  authorities,  but  the  co-operatives  have  usually  been  too
politically  weak to  perform  this  balancing  function  effectively,  and  are  often  run
by  parastatals  that  themselves  operate  within  PS  networks.  Some  council  pres-
idents  admit  that  no  affectation  decision  is  made  without  consulting  with  the
traditional  chiefs.  Councils  have  rejected  applications  for  unused  land  because
the  applicants  failed to  contact the proprigaires-i.e., the traditional  landholders-
before  submitting  the  application."

Even  the  supposedly  technocratic  parastatal,  the  Sociit  d'aminagement et  d'ex-
ploitation des  terres du  delta du fleuve  Sinigal, de la  vallie dufleuve  Sbnlgal et  de  la Falkme
(Socit  d'amnagement et d'exploitation du delta,  or  SAED) usually  ensured  that  it  had
the  acquiescence  of  the  traditional  authorities,  presumably  because  it  has  a
general  interest  in  avoiding conflict  with  local  elites,  encouraged  by  those  elites'
place  within  the  PS  apparatus.  As  the  SAED  has  disengaged  itself  from  the
business  of  co-ordinating  farming,  it  has  left  the  traditional  authorities'  land-
allocating  functions  intact8 6

On  occasion,  lower-caste  actors,  frustrated  by  the  unresponsiveness  of  the
Rural  Councils,  resort  to  other  means.  In  Thioubalel,  a  "conseil  de  notables"  of
elders  formed  in  opposition  to  the  Rural  Council  and  affected  a  vegetable  field
to  a  women's  grouping.  The  sub-prefect  warned  the  group  that  only  the  Rural
Council  could  allocate  land,  but  the  head  of the  local  CERP delineated  the  plot
soon  thereafter.8 7  No  conflict  resulted  from  the  actions  of the  conseil de  notables,
perhaps  because  the  Rural  Council  did  not see  the  parcel  as  worth  a  fight  or
the  conseil de  notables as  likely  to  prove  a  substantial  threat  in  the  future.88

Despite  these  occasional  conflicts  and  irregularities,  there  is  a  perception
among  elites  of  popular  consensus  in  favour  of  these  practices,  for  example,
granting  land  to  bnigris. There  is  in  fact  a  lack  of consensus  on this  issue  even
among  administrative  elites.  For  example,  some  councils  have  conflicted  with
the  administrations  of Communes-non-rural communities,  ranging  in  size  from
Dakar  (about a  million residents)  to N'Dioum  (about  15,000)-because  residents
of those  Communes who  had come  from a  Rural  Community  sought to  have their
land  reaffected  to  them,  but  met  with  opposition  from  the  councils.8 9

In  all,  conflicts  occur  sporadically,  but  not  infrequently.  Municipal  ad-
ministrations  clash  with  each  other  over  the  limits  of their jurisdiction.  Land-
holders  or tenant farmers dispute  the limits of their parcels,  due to  the  absence  of
documented  delineations. Agriculturalists  conflict with pastoralists over traditional
and LDN usage  rights. Emaris and  those  who have used  the land  in their absence
conflict  when  the  brnigns wish  to  have  land  reaffected  to  them.  Current  tenant
farmers  or  low-caste  affectaires sometimes  come  into  conflict  with  entrepreneurs
or high-caste  landholders when  members of either class seek to have land affected
to  themselves.  And  Rural  Councils  and  individuals  may  oppose  state  attempts

85  Interview  with  Sagna  and Liakos,  op. cit.,  n.  71;  interview  with  Abdullaye  Gallo  B.  (President,
Rural  Council  of Gaxnadji-Sar  ),  24 June,  1996,  in  N'Dioum;  "Les  enjeux  fonciers  dans  le  Delta",
op.  cit.,  n. 54;  Sylla,  op.  cit.,  n.  18,  64. In  Gamadji-Sar6,  the  traditional  elites  are  particularly  well
entrenched:  Mountoga  Tall,  who  heads  the  national  T"uiane  Muslim  brotherhood  (rivals  of  the
Mourides) hails  from  this  community;  his  brother,  Kad& Tall,  is  the  most  influential  marabout  in
Gamadji-Sar.  See  interview  with  Sagna  and Liakos,  op.  cit.,  n.  71.

'6  Niasse,  op.  cit.,  n.  40,  94.
87  Sylla,  op.  cit.,  n.  18,  63.
'  The  Rural  Council  appears  to  have  been  right.  I  have  found  no  evidence  of further  activity

by  the  consel de notable.

89  Interview  with Bi,  op.  cit.,  n.  85; see  also  "Les  enjeux  fonciers  dans  le  Delta",  op.  cit.,  n.  54;

"La  d~limitation,  solution  idoine",  op.  cit.,  n.  60.

Vol.  43,  No.  I

Growing Securio

to  redesignate  zones du  terroir as  zones pionires, lands  designated  for  parastatal  use
or  lease  to  corporations.9"  All  of  these  conflicts  clearly  add  to  the  insecurity  of
land  tenure  that the  farmers  face,  entailing  direct costs  of litigation  or  mediation
as  well.

Local  structures  and national  policies:  water, credit  and
technology

Land  rights  are  also  related  to  state  development  policies.  The governments
of Mali,  Mauritania  and  Senegal,  through  the  Organisation pour la  mise en  valeur de
la  valle dufleuve  Sindgal (OMVS),  dammed  the  Senegal  River  at Manantali,  Mali,
primarily  to  produce  hydro-electric  power;  the  OMVS  completed  the  dam  in
1988.  The  OMVS's  dam  at  Diama, just  above  the  head  of  the  Senegal  River
delta,  prevents  salt  water from  the  delta from  leaching  hundreds  of miles  up the
flat  river.  The  regularity  of flows  and  decreases  in  flooding  and  salinity  due  to
the  dams  have  enabled  widespread  irrigation.  Early  on,  the  SAED  controlled
most of the  irrigated  land and primarily  grew rice, but the state  has now returned
much  of this  land  to  Rural  Councils. 91

Many residents  of the area  have  opposed  the  flood  control,  however,  because
it makes  traditional  flood-recession  agriculture  impossible,  and  harms  the river's
ecology.  The OMVS  had  originally  intended  to  decrease  the  flooding  gradually
to  allow  residents  to  adjust,  but  was  unsuccessful  in  replicating  flood  cycles  in
the  early  years  of  Manantali's  operation,  especially  in  1989-1991.  During  the
worst years of drought and inappropriate  flooding, many farmers did not produce
enough  of their  crops  to  feed  their  families,  let  alone  to  sell.9 2  The  OMVS  is
quite  autonomous  and  technocratic,  however,  and  did  not  respond  well  to
farmers'  needs.

The  Senegalese  government  now  favours  continuing  the  floods,  though  Mali
and  Mauritania  prefer  the  original  policy  of gradually  phasing  them  out.  One
local  NGO,  the  Senegal  River  Basin  Monitoring  Authority  (SRBMA),  has
suggested  that flood-recession  agriculture's  low input costs, compared  to  irrigated
agriculture,  are  better  suited to the  risks  inherent in farming,  including economic
and  climatic  variations.  Farmers  can  then  devote  remaining  labour  and  capital
to  diversified  activities  and thus  minimize  the  harm  that would  result from crop
failure.  Such  self-insurance  might be more  valuable  than  the  increased rice  yields
from  irrigation;  in  fact,  the  lost  value  of  fish,  sorghum  and  livestock  from  the
floodplain  might  outweigh  the  gains  in  rice  from  irrigation  in  a  good  year.
Moreover,  the  increased  labour  burden  for  irrigated  agriculture  is  likely  to  fall
primarily  on  women  and  children.  And  decreasing  productivity  due  to  high
production  costs  may  reduce  the  cohesion  and  productivity  of  co-operatives,
ultimately  leading  to  the  shrinkage  or dissolution  of some  co-operatives. 93

In  addition,  the  SRBMA  found  that  access  to  land  was  not  becoming
more  equitable  on  irrigated  farmlands,  despite  the  OMVS's  stated  intention  of

9  Di6  Maty  Fall,  "Dbveloppement  de  la  Valle:  Rien  ne  se  fera  sans  les  populations",  (16-17
April,  1994)  Le  Soleil  4  (interview  with  Thierno  Bi,  president  of Projet  integr4  de  Podor,  a  local
development  NGO).

9" Mathieu, Niasse  and Vinck6,  op.  cit.,  n. 27,  217,  228;  Muneera Salem-Murdock  and Madiodio
Niasse,  Land  Use,  Labour  Dynamics,  and  Household Production  Strategies:  The  Senegal River  Valley,  IDA
Working  Paper  No.  94,  Binghamton,  NY,  1993,  1.

92 Salem-Murdock  and Niasse,  op,  cit.,  n.  91,  6-7,  13.
93  Ibid.,  8-12,  19.

Growing Securiy1

[1999]  J.A.L.

increasing lower castes'  control  over productive  lands.  The  toorotobe had acquired
a  disproportionate  quantity  of  the  new  irrigated  perimeters,  as  had  the  sebbe,
another  high caste.  On the other  hand,  low-caste gniegnbe, artisans, and  mathioube,
former  slaves,  have  had  limited  access  to  the  new  irrigated  perimeters.  The
castes  have  thus  remained  stratified  in  their  access  to  land.94

To  the  extent  that  irrigated  land  has  been  transferred  from  former  elites  to
small farmers,  some  was  illegally  sold.  Because  the  users'  tenure  is  thus  insecure,
they are  likely  to  under-invest  in  their land.  Higher  castes  have  also  transferred
some  irrigated  perimeters  to  lower  castes  by  traditional  loans,  which  are  also
illegal.  Most  of  the  lower  castes'  wealth  derives  from  these  leased  lands,  but
these  relations  require  the  highest  payment,  the  assakal, to  landholders.  To  the
extent that lower-caste  farmers have  gained access to the irrigation works, capital-
poor  farmers  of small  plots  rely  on  credit  from  higher  castes  or  the  state;  the
SRBMA  concluded  that  these  small  farmers  are  thus  merely  "disguised  wage
labour".  Finally,  many  of the  new  irrigated  perimeters  are  undertaken  primarily
to  obtain  governmental  incentives;  they  are  not  independently  sustainable  in-
vestments  and pursuing them frequently  requires  the  abandonment  of other, still
viable  perimeters."

Opposition  to  the  flood  control  never  fully  faded,  and  flooding  resumed
successfully  in  1994.  The  continued  flooding  has  meant  that  only those  parties
with  resources  sufficient  to  construct  flood-protection  levees,  typically  outside
entrepreneurs  and foreign  agribusinesses,  can  safely  invest  in  irrigation  works  in
the  waalo  and  have  multiple  growing  seasons.96  The  demand  for  the  highest
lands,  the  dieri,  which  are  rain-fed  and  difficult  to  irrigate,  has  not  risen
significantly.  But  the foonde  lands,  between  the  waalo  and  the  diet/,  have  been
more  easily  irrigated,  especially  in  village  perimeters.  The  demand for  and value
of  illegal  leases  on  these  lands  have  risen,  and  farming  has  been  increasingly
individualized-i.e.,  lease parcels have  become smaller and more numerous--due
to  the  increased  demand.  Outright  sales,  also  illegal,  do  not  appear  to  have
increased,  however,  and  landholdings  by  affectation  have  also  not  become
substantially  more  fragmented. 97

Thus,  the  technological  changes  wrought  by  the  state  have  resulted  in  some
new patterns  of demand  for and  usability of land. These patterns  have  somewhat
destabilized  traditional  social  structures  and  their  modes  of  access  to  land,
especially  where  low-caste  gniegnbe  and  mathioube,  often  in  co-operatives,  have
gained  access  to  land.  But  these  effects  have  been  limited  and,  because  leases
are  illegal  under  the  LDN,  tenant  farmers  typically  do  not seek to  have  the land
affected  to  them.

The  limited  availability of credit clearly  limits  farmers'  opportunities  to  invest
in  their  lands.  Most  farmers,  including  the affectaires, do not  have  full  title  to the
land, nor much other property  as collateral.  This lack directly  slows  development
by  depriving  the  farmers  of  the  means  of  improving  land.  It  also  operates
indirectly:  elites  with  better  access  to  capital  have  a  greater  capacity  to  effect

94  Ibid.,  16;  Niasse,  op. cit.,  n.  40,  170.
95  Salem-Murdock  and  Niasse,  op.  cit.,  n.  91,  16-17.
96Interview  with  Sagna  and Liakos,  op.  cit.,  n.  71;  Mathieu,  Niasse  and  Vinck6,  op.  cit.,  n.  27,

232.

97 Platteau,  op.  cit.,  n.  8,  142-143;  interview  with  Sagna  and  Liakos,  op.  cit.,  n.  71;  interview

with  BA,  op. cit.,  n.  85.

Vol.  43,  No.  I

Growing Security

the land's  mise  en  valeur, and  are  thus  more  likely  to  have  land  affected  to  them,
reducing  the  tenure  security  of the  (usually poorer)  farmers  on the  land.98

NGOs such  as the Projet Intigri de Podor (PIP) and parastatals  such as  the SAED
and  the  Socit!  nationale du  cridit rural (SNCR)  have  attempted  to  extend  rural
credit themselves.99  But these  programmes  have not been  self-sustaining  because
farmers  facing poor  weather  and unreliable  distribution networks  have  not  been
able  to  make  regular  payments.  The  loans  are  inadequately  collateralized  by
design  to  include  farmers without sufficient private  property,  and the NGOs  and
parastatals  encourage  farmers  to use irrigation,  pesticides  and fertilizers  that  cost
as  much  as  the  average  annual  earnings  from  crop  sales." °

The  government  has also  promoted  climatically  unsuitable  crops,  such  as rice
or  groundnuts,  especially  through  the  SAED,  to  meet  high  demand  in  the
consumer  market.  Rice  in  particular  requires  extensive  irrigation.  In  addition,
growing  only one  or  two  crops  increases  the  risk  to  the  farmer,  compared  to  a
more  diversified  portfolio  of  crops.  The  policy  of  financing  and  subsidizing
irrigation  and  providing  inputs  is  intended  to  decrease  opposition  by  farmers  to
the  Manantali  Dam: consideration  of agricultural  issues  were  secondary  to power
generation  in  the  planning  of the  dam  and  intended  mainly  to  counteract  the
harm  done  by  the  disruption  of the  floods.'

The  early  stages  of government  disengagement  also  contributed  to  farmers'
indebtedness.  During  this  period,  the  SAED  and  the  Office  national de  coopiration
et  assistance pour  le  diveloppement  (ONCAD)  undertook  projects  that  could  be
rentabilisis-i.e., that  could  generate  a  profit-to  defray  the  high  cost  of  the
Manantali  and  Diama  dams. The  SAED  expanded  its credit operations  and cut
back  on  its  direct  subsidies,  but  still  endorsed  improvements  as  conditions  for
obtaining  credit.  These  programmes  failed  to  consider  farmers'  general  lack  of
access  to  insurance  markets,  or  even  to  the  monetized  economy."2  The  attempt
to  rentabilize the  projects  has  failed  as  many  farmers  have  defaulted  on  their
loans. 103

These  failures were  especially  acute  during  the  low-rainfall years  of the  1980s
and early  1990s; because  of these defaults, the government has often  appropriated
the land itself and leased  it  to foreign  agribusinesses,  or turned  a blind  eye  when
Rural  Councils  have  affected  land  to  outside  entrepreneurs.  These  practices
highlight  the  contradiction  in  the LDN  between  the  goals  of securing  the tenure
of farmers  already working  the land  and local  control  over  allocation,  and those
of maximizing  domestic  crop  production.° 4

The  irrigated perimeters  also often  fail  to  increase  crop yields,  in  part  because
the  farmers  may  lack  adequate  training  in  the  construction  and maintenance  of
the  perimeters.  Irrigation  works  are  frequently  without  appropriate  drainage

98 Other  factors  also  slow  development  such  as  lack  of access  to  reliable  distribution  networks,
the  state's appropriation  of large  tracts  of land (though this  practice  has abated  in recent  years),  and
uncertainty  about  the  status  of Mauritanian  refugees.  See  Fall,  op.  cit.,  n.  90,  4;  Niasse,  op.  cit.,  n.
40,  93-94.

and  Deb~ne,  op.  cit.,  n.  3, 282-283.

9  Fall,  op.  cit.,  n.  90.
'0 Interview  with  Sagna  and  Liakos,  op.  cit.,  n.  71;  Niasse,  op.  cit.,  n.  40,  93-94;  Caverivire
"0I Fall,  op.  cit.,  n.  90;  "Les  enjeux  fonciers  dans  le Delta",  op.  cit.,  n.  54.
102 Interview  with  Sagna  and  Liakos,  op.  cit.,  n.  71;  interview  with  Amadou  Sow  (president  of
Gestion villageoise de t'espae naturel de Podor, N'dioum),  24 June,  1996,  in  N'dioum;  Fall,  op  cit.,  n.  90;
"Les  enjeux fonciers  dans  le Delta",  op. cit.,  n.  54.

:03 Niasse,  op.  cit.,  n.  40,  92.
'4 Mathieu,  Niasse  and  VinckE,  op. cit.,  n.  27,  236-237.

Growing Secuf1 

[1999]  J.A.L.

A

networks,  and  the  standing  water  causes  salts  to  leach  up  from  beneath  the
surface.  This  process  facilitates  increased  crop  yields  in  the  short  term,  because
of  the  more  intensive  use  of the  water,  but  the  rapid  salinization  of  the  soils
causes  substantial  decreases  in  crop  yields  within  three  to  four  years.  The  land
then takes  years  to recover  from  this  unproductive state.  Farmers  then leave  this
land,  and seek  new allocations  of unused  plots  and  subsidies  for their  irrigation,
resulting in an "itinerant  irrigated agriculture"." 5 In such a system, tenure  security
becomes  unimportant  because  the  investments  actually  decrease  productivity  in
the  long  term.

The  state  has  not  adequately  funded  efforts  by  the  CERPs  to  remedy  this
situation,  and  the  problem  has worsened  since  control  of the  perimeters  passed
from  the  SAED  to  the  Rural  Communities,  which  lack  any  technical  expertise.
The  benefits  of increasing  technical  expertise  may  be  limited, however,  as  even
the  best-drained  irrigation  systems  cause  some  salinization  of  topsoil't 6  Some
have  suggested  that  the state  should  completely  disengage  from  agriculture  and
stop  subsidizing  irrigation  entirely." 7

Proponents  of technical  training  insist that  the technical  complexity  of capital
improvements  and  new  techniques  are  a  significant  but  surmountable  obstacle
to  development,  and  that  training  complements  development.  Or  farmers  may
become  intimidated  by  costs  and  the  complexity,  and  decide  not  to  undertake
the projects. 8  But,  as mentioned,  the  national  government  has  withdrawn  from
agriculture  since  the  mid-1980s,  under  structural  adjustment  programmes,0 9
which  at least  promises to  reduce  the  effects  of the costly  and inappropriate  loan
schemes it has  thrust on  local  farmers.  Still,  many  farmers  remain  indebted,  and
the  government's  withdrawal  of technical  support  has  led  to  the  degradation  of
soils.  In  any case,  the withdrawal  of the  state  cannot  improve  the  security  of the
small  farmer's  tenure  and  private  rural  credit  has  not  appeared  now  that
conditional  state  credit  has dried  up.

NGOs including  the  Projet Integri de Podor (PIP) and  the  newer  Gestion villageoise
de 1'espace naturel de Podor (GVEP) probably  cannot change  the  institutional  regimes
that define  land  rights  in  the  study  region.  They  can,  however,  assist  farmers  in
improving  their  productivity  and  incomes.  Cyclically,  increased  assets  may  also
eventually  improve  farmers'  access  to  credit;  and  both  greater  wealth  and  the
participatory modes of these  NGOs strengthen farmers'  institutions,  their position
in  rural  society  and the  security  of their  tenure.

Local  NGOs  have  attempted  to  popularize  methods  of resource  conservation
and  assessment."0  As  a  result,  communities  have  developed  and  implemented
their  own  natural  resource  management  plans.  The  participatory  assessments
have  also  led  the  farmers  to  request  further  training  where  they  see  a  need. At
the  very  least,  farmers  will  presumably  develop  a  sense  of  ownership  of these

105 Thiam,  op.  cit.,  n.  72.

06  Ibid.
07  Caverivi~re  and  Db6ne,  op.  cit.,  n.  3,  293.
'0s  Sylla,  op.  cit.,  n.  18,  70.
09  Dicret No.  87-720, 4  avril  1987, Portant le  reversement de  certaines Zones  pioniires dans  la  Zone  des
terroirs.  The  report  accompanying  the  decree  suggested  that  local  control  would  provide  better
resource  management.  Rapport de  la presentation du  projet du  Dicret portat le  reversement  de  certaines Zones
pionires dans la Zone des  terroirs, Dakar,  1987.  See  also  Salem-Murdock  and  Niasse,  op.  cit.,  n.  91,  7;
Niasse,  op.  cit.,  n.  40,  82-83.

"'  GVEP has  developed  its  own Mithode accilire de recherche participative (MARP) and Mithode accedlie
de  planfication participative (MAPP)-a  more  participatory  version  of the  Peace  Corps'  Rapid  Rural
Appraisal-and  translated  these  tools  into  Pulaar.

Vol.  43,  No.  I

Growing Secuii

tools  they  have  requested,  and  should use  and  maintain  them  more  consistently
than  they  did  under  state-imposed  plans.  Finally,  GVEP  is  attempting  to
understand  and catalogue local, traditional  measures for maintaining or increasing
productivity,  which  may be  transferable."'

These local  actors have developed  such programmes  in response  to the  negative
effects of the programs  of the SAED,  ONCAD,  and  other development  agencies'
programmes  on farmers'  motivation,  co-operation  and productivity.  These  effects
resulted  from  the  agencies'  excessive  intervention  in  the  farmers'  day-to-day
operations,  often in ignorance  of local  agricultural  conditions  and social  relations.
In some  instances,  the SAED  usurped  the role  of the  Rural  Councils,  and  made
affectation  decisions  on  some  of the  zones  des  terroirs. The  ONCAD  did  sponsor
infrastructure  projects,  including  schools,  markets,  pharmacies  and  clinics,  but
it  concentrated  these  projects  in  the  larger  towns.  Most  of the  parastatals'  lands
have  reverted  to  the  zones  des  terroirs, under  the  Rural  Councils'  control." 2  The
NGOs  have  attempted  to step  into  the  technical  void  left  by the  parastatals  with
methods they consider  more  appropriate  and  sustainable. Their  long-term  effects
have  yet  to  be  measured.

There  is also  a major  recent lacuna in  the  state's  control  over rural  lands.  For
several  years,  farmers  have  been  able  to  buy  land  already  affected  to  them, by
ceding  a  third  of it  to  the  state  and  acquiring  freehold  title  to  the  rest,  or  by
paying  the  state  for  title  to  the  whole  tract.  However,  the  existence  of  this
opportunity is not  widely known,  especially in  the study  region, and most farmers
can  afford  neither  the  large  fee  for the  purchase  of the  land,  nor  the sacrifice  of
a  third  of  the  area.  Similarly  many  farmers  work  land  that  is  not  officially
allocated  to  them,  and  therefore,  land  titling  has  not  yet  become  a  significant
phenomenon.113

CONCLUSIONS

On paper,  the  Loi relative au Domaine national seems to  provide significant  tenure
security,  which  should  at  least  result  in  an  optimal  level  of investment  in  land
by the  affectaire, especially  given  its provision  for compensation  for improvements
made.  The  administration  of land  by  the  Rural  Councils  and  the  prohibitions
on  sales,  however,  keep  land  from being  efficiently  distributed  to  those  best  able
to  use  it.  But this  is  a  choice  of economic  models  and  social  functioning:  rather
than  allowing  the  often  harsh  free  market  to  operate  in  the  already  difficult
conditions  of  the  Western  Sahel,  the  LDN  leaves  the  allocation  of land  for
productive  use to municipal  bodies,  and prohibits  the taking  of land from affectaires
currently  using  it.

In fact,  the  system as  administered  entails  a number  of additional  costs. Lower
castes  have  made  some  inroads  into  control  of  irrigated  perimeters,  due  in
part  to  a  new-found  solidarity  in  some  co-operatives  and  castes.  The  LDN's
requirement  that  the  affectaire reside  in  the  Rural  Community  strengthens  their
claim  against  outside  entrepreneurs,  and the  requirement that  the  affectaire or his
family  farm  the  land  further  buttresses  them  against  elites  seeking  to  invest  in
the  land.  But  the  Rural  Councils  apply  these  requirements  irregularly,  if at  all,

.. Interview  with  Sagna  and  Liakos,  op.  cit.,  n.  71;  interview  with  Sow,  op, cit.,  n.  102.
112  Niang, op.  cit.,  n.  57,  107-108;  Caverivi~re  and  Db~ne,  op. cit.,  n.  3,  306.
113  Interview  with  Gaspar  Goumis  (private  farm  owner,  Casamance),  13  June,  1996,  in  Dakar;

"Les  enjeux  fonciers  dans  le  Delta:  Les  obstacles  A la  rfforme",  (21  June,  1990) Le  Soleit  2.

Growuing Secuiy

[1999] J.A.L.

and the  reading  of the  LDN  dictating  that  the  council  should  affect  land  to  the
party  able  to  use  it  most  productively  may  be  used  to  support  allocation  to
wealthy  entrepreneurs.

This  mandate  of  optimal  productive  use  thus  often  conflicts  with  the  re-
quirement  that  those  using  their  land  be  allowed  to  continue  doing  so,  where
the current users are  poor farmers,  as well as with the  personal  use and (sometimes)
the  residency  requirements.  The  contradiction  between  these  mandates  allows
councils  to  choose  an  outcome  on other  bases  and justify  it as  they  will.  When
conflicts  do arise  between  users  and  elites,  the  elites almost  always  prevail,  even
when  the  lower-caste  parties  have  a  faction  of councillors  behind  them.  All  of
these  patterns  weaken  the  small  tenant  farmer's  tenure  security,  as  do  conflicts
due  to  unclear  boundaries.

A cadastral survey  could resolve  at least the conflicts  relating to the delineations
of individuals'  holdings  and  municipalities'  jurisdictions.  To  date,  its  costs  have
remained  prohibitively high.  But  there  are  also  traditional  methods  to define  the
limits  of land."'  Thus,  the  absence  of a  cadastral  survey  is  felt  mainly  in  the
context  of more  modem  situations  and  institutions  that  exceed  the  boundaries
of  small  traditional  communities,  such  as  Rural  Communities.  In  short,  the
current  land  tenure  system  needs  a  cadastral  survey  mainly  to  resolve  the
significant  problems  created  by  modern  land  tenure  issues.

In  a  sense,  the  very  existence  of the  Rural  Council  may  itself generate,  or  at
least  extend  conflict.  The  possibility  of contesting  another's  claim  to land  before
the  council, where  this  organ  is distinct  from  the  traditional  authorities,  provides
an  alternative  arena  for conflicts  over land.  The possibility  of taking  conflicts  to
this  second arena may extend them beyond the point where traditional  authorities
would  have  resolved  the  conflicts  in  favour  of one  party.

The  small farmers  can  only rival  the  investment  capabilities  of elites  with  state
assistance,  which still comes with  strings  of heavy  and often inappropriate  tutelage
attached.  This  state  involvement  usually  results  in  sub-optimal  productivity,  in
spite  of the  farmers'  enhanced  investment  capacity.  Alternatively,  small  farmers
lie  about  their  investment  capacity  in order  to  have  land  affected  to  them,  with
the  result  that  their  productivity  does  not  meet  the  claims  of  their  affectation
applications.

Instability,  vagueness  and  insufficient  capacity  seem  endemic  to  state  action
in  Senegalese  agriculture.  Parastatals,  large  corporations  and  local  actors  have
been  engaged  in  a  tug-of-war  over  the  last  25  years,  with  decreasing  state
the  last  decade.  Recently,  the
involvement  in  agriculture  in  approximately 
government  has  turned  a  blind  eye  on  the  occasions  where  the  councils  have
themselves  taken  these  large  tracts  formerly  run  by  parastatals  and  leased  them
to  corporations.  This  shifting  matrix  of  actors  and  authority.can  only  weaken
the  perceived  and  actual  security  of the  users  of the  land.

Similarly,  Rural  Councils  could  improve  their  administration  of land  affecta-
tions by maintaining accurate  registries and by establishing  Commissions domaniales,
but these tools require unavailable  resources  and political  will.  Where the councils
have created such commissions,  the latter have  been largely co-opted by traditional
elites.  The  few  instances  where  the  commissions  have  operated  independently,
or  where  some  portion  of the  councils  has  sought  to  protect co-operatives  from

"M  Caverivi~re  and  Db  ne,  op.  cit.,  n.  3, 298-299.

Vol.  43,  No.  I

Growing  ecurio

expropriations  by  elites  have  typically  led  to  conflict  and  a  breakdown  in  the
council's  operations.

Therefore,  land  users'  relative  powerlessness  raises  equity  concerns,  while
tenants'  traditional  obligations-and  their  insecurity  due to  conflict  and the  legal
bias  against users  with  lesser  investment capabilities-entail  efficiency  costs.  The
recent  responses  of  local  NGOs  reflect  this  insecurity:  rather  than  assisting
farmers  in  installing  land-specific  improvements,  such  as  irrigation  works,  the
NGOs  have  largely  undertaken  projects  that  build  transferable  capacity  and
skills.  The  ultimate  removal  of  land  from  the  control  of  local,  small  farmers
probably  has  its  own,  further  efficiency  costs,  since  small  farms  produce  more
efficiently,  especially where  the  cost of labour  relative  to capital  is low  and where
the  small  farm  uses  family  labour.

In  comparison,  a purely  traditional  tenure  system  may actually  provide  more
secure  tenure, especially where the  reciprocity  of feudal or caste  relations remains
strong.  The  landholders  have  few opportunities  to  remove  the users  of the land,
as  long  as  the  latter  continue  to  use  the  land  productively  and  to  pay  the
appropriate  share  of the crops. The increasing  monetization  of the rural  economy
and  mobility of rural populations  probably have weakened  the sense  of reciprocal
obligation  between  elites  and  small  farmers,  but  it  should  not  be  taken  for
granted that traditional  tenure  systems  are automatically  less secure  than modern
ones.  The  traditional  tenure  systems  in  the  Fuuta  also  provide  a  form  of credit,
the njimaandi where  the assakal is paid  after  the land has been  farmed.  In  contrast,
farmers  of kedde leydi, pay the ndjoldi share  before planting. The difference  between
the  ndjoldi  and  the  assakal-the latter  is  typically  a  larger  share-represents
interest.

The  continued  strength  of the  traditional  elite  largely  results  from  the  lower
castes'  general  support  of  traditional  structures,  in  part  for  religious  reasons.
Land  users'  strong  resistance  to  becoming  a  "rural  working  class",  especially
in  the  traditional  system  of  share-
compared  to  their  relative  acquiescence 
cropping,  demonstrates  this  support.  That  Rural  Councils  controlled  by  tra-
ditional  elites  can  resist  the  creation  of  Commissions domaniales plainly  conceived
to  further  the  explicit  technocratic  ends  of  the  LDN  also  shows  the  strength  of
these  elites  relative  to  the  state  apparatus.

Creating  a  more  equitable  or  efficient  system  would  require  the  redefinition
of underlying  social  and  religious  tenets  and  relations,  a  process  that  may  have
begun.  Some  lower-caste  actors  have  wilfully  challenged  the  traditional  elites.
Some  elite  landholders'  self-designation  as propriitaires, a concept  that violates  the
traditional  narrative  of communal  ownership,  may have  emboldened  the  lower-
caste  claimants.  On  the  other  hand,  the  elites'  symbiotic  relationship  with  the
national  PS  gives  them  bureaucratic  legitimacy  as  well.  The  costly  current
conflicts  and  the  insecurities  they  produce  are  proliably  less  than  the  conflicts
that  could  arise  if traditional  elites'  authority  were  more  seriously  challenged.

Land  users'  resistance  to  becoming  a  "rural  working  class"  also  underlines
their  sense  of  spiritual  attachment  to  the  land,  which  a  traditional  patron's
control  does  not  interrupt  while  a  capitalist  employer's  does.  This  attachment
creates  doubts  as  to  whether  a  system  of  freely  alienable,  individually-owned
land would,  in  fact,  be  more  efficient,  since  users  value  it  for its  spiritual  worth
as  well  as  for its  productivity.  Economists  might  view  a  valuation  that  does  not
reflect  economic  production  as  a  market  failure  that  should  be  corrected.  But

62 

Grou'ng  Secufity 

[1999]  J.A.L.

that  view ignores  that  such  a  change  might be  impossible  to  effect intentionally,
or that  it would  at least  require  the disintegration  of current  social  relations  and
trust, at  a  high  cost.

It  is  thus  unclear  that  "modern"  land  rights  of any  sort  are  necessarily  more
efficient  than  the  traditional  tenure  arrangements  of the  Fuuta  Tooro.  Rather,
the  instability  of the  current,  overlapping  forms  of authority  lend  themselves  to
an  unpredictable  and  often  personal  and  subjective  use  of that  authority.  The
commodification and  monetization  of rural  markets  are  gradually breaking down
traditional  relations,  but  these  remain  strong  enough.  And  the  Senegalese
government  has  not yet  articulated  a  coherent  plan for  commodifying land.  The
state  and  its  Bretton  Woods  tutors  should  undertake  such  a  programme  with
caution,  however,  given  the  historical  tendencies  for  titling schemes  to  result  in
inequitable  and  inefficient  concentrations  of land  ownership;  a  system  aiming at
control  of land  by co-operatives  is  better  suited  to  take  advantage  of low  labour
costs,  and  to  prevent  the  disenfranchisement  of small  farmers.

Reforms  of  the  system  require  more  participatory,  dialogic  and  capacity-
building forms  of state  assistance,  careful consideration  of the  ecological  context;
resistance  against  concentration 
in  the  process  of  liberalization,  and  the  es-
tablishment  of a firm,  transparent  and accountable  system  of administration  and
oversight.  It  may  be  difficult  to  meet  these  conditions,  given  the  influence  of
urban  and  traditional  elites  and  the  uprooting  of  social  relations  through  land
that  such  reforms  are  likely  to  entail.  However,  each  of these  conditions  must
be  met  to  end  this  period  of  unstable  land  regimes  in  the  Fuuta  Tooro  and
establish  a  system  of  land  tenure  than  allows  the  region  to  produce  food  with
equity  and  efficiency.

EPILOGUE:  DECENTRALIZATION

Recently,  the  national  government  has  continued  to  downsize,  as  part  of its
latest  structural  adjustment  plan.  To  this  end,  it  passed  a  series  of  laws  in
early  1996  decentralizing  authority  and  ceding  more  to  local  political  actors.
Presumably,  this  reform  will  result  in  fewer  subsidies  to  small  farmers  and
less  oversight  of  agriculture.  Other  than  this  effect,  it  is  difficult  to  see  how
decentralization  will  affect  land  rights  in  rural  Senegal.  In  the  rare  instances
where  a higher administrative  actor, such  as  the prefect,  might have  sided  against
the elites,  the  reforms will probably constrain  him from doing so  now. Conversely,
where  co-operatives  or other  groupings  of mostly  lower-caste  actors  successfully
challenge  elites  at  the  Council  level,  those  elites  will  presumably  have  a  limited
ability  to  seek  intervention  from  above.  But  these  are  cases  at the  margin,  and
the  decentralization  is  unlikely  to  change  the  essence  of  land  rights,  given  the
extent  to  which  they  were  already  decentralized.

