CHAPTER 14
Gender and urban agriculture in Pikine, 
Senegal
Gora Gaye and Mamadou Ndong Touré

Abstract

This case study is based on a review of exploratory research on urban agriculture 
in Pikine, conducted by IAGU in 2004, and additional data gathered in 2008 
in the context of the small project ‘Establishing a Proper Input and Equipment 
Supply System for Urban Agricultural Producers in Pikine-North’, implemented by 
PROVANIA, a farmers’ organization in Pikine, with the support of IAGU. A review 
of this pilot project shows that although gender aspects were taken into account 
during the design, planning, and implementation phases, the project nevertheless 
focused  mainly  on  production  aspects  (dominated  by  the  men)  and  pays  little 
attention  to  the  transport,  processing,  and  marketing  aspects  (dominated  by 
women). Priority constraints and interests that are speciﬁ c to women and mainly 
related to processing and marketing were ignored.

Introduction
Background
This case study is based on the experiences gained in a pilot project entitled 
‘Supporting the Establishment of a Proper Input and Equipment Supply System 
for Urban Agricultural Producers in Pikine-North’, which was formulated and 
implemented in 2007 and 2008 by the local farmers’ organization PROVANIA, 
with co-funding from the international Resource Centres on Urban Agriculture 
and Food Security – Cities Farming for the Future programme (RUAF–CFF), 
regionally  co-ordinated  by  the  African  Institute  for  Urban  Management 
(IAGU) in Senegal. 

This pilot project is a follow-up to a Multi-stakeholder Policy formulation 
and Action Planning (MPAP) process, involving several local institutions and 
urban agricultural producers’ organizations in Pikine, supported by RUAF–CFF. 
This process started in 2005 by undertaking a (gender-sensitive) exploratory 
study of urban agriculture in the Pikine area, identifying the limited access 
of  urban  producers  to  agricultural  inputs  and  equipment  as  one  of  the 
factors that limit the development and sustainability of urban agriculture in 

Copyright practicalactionpublishing.com

220  WOMEN FEEDING CITIES

Pikine, alongside land insecurity, poor access to credit, and other factors. The 
diagnostic phase was followed by joint development of a City Strategic Agenda 
on Urban Agriculture. This Strategic Agenda is being implemented now, co-
ordinated by the participating organizations and institutions, including this 
pilot project by PROVANIA.

The area of Pikine
Pikine is located within a system of continental dunes, broken by depressions 
and  valleys,  named  the  Niayes  Valley.  The  physical  characteristics  of  the 
Niayes are fairly favourable for agricultural production. The annual rainfalls 
vary considerably, between 200 and 900 mm per year. The climate is tropical, 
characterized by alternation between a dry season – eight months, from early 
November to mid-July – and a rainy season from mid-July to the end of October. 
The natural vegetation of the Niayes is abundant (MUAT, 2004). These plots of 
land are sought after by building companies, although the groundwater is close 
to the surface, because buildings nowadays are constructed on good-quality 
embankments. However, the construction of infrastructure, such as water and 
electrical-supply facilities, is hampered by the physical characteristics of the 
area. 

Pikine had around 800,000 inhabitants in 2002, 63.5 per cent of whom 
were aged under 25 (ANSD, 2004). Pikine was a dormitory town for a long 
time,  but  its  economy  has  started  growing  in  the  past  few  years.  However, 
apart from the free industrial zone, most of the economic activities still take 
place in the informal sector and, to a lesser extent, in horticulture and ﬁ sh 
breeding in the Niayes (MUAT, 2003).

Urban agriculture in Pikine-Niayes
Urban agricultural activities in Pikine-Niayes include production, processing, 
and marketing activities. The main production systems are market-oriented 
horticulture (vegetables and fruits), small-scale (home) gardening, traditional 
ﬁ shing and ﬁ sh breeding, tree nurseries and forestry, local cereal processing, 
and poultry farming. 

Among the producers (over 1,500) in the Department of Pikine, horticulture 
is the main activity, due to the presence of water near the surface (céanes). In 
2001, 501 horticulture farms were present in Pikine. The size of the plots varies 
between 100 m² and 5.9 ha. Women represent 21 per cent of the producers and 
are mainly involved in the marketing of products, although some of them also 
work on the farms. The main products are aubergine, lettuce, onion, chilli, 
parsley, leek, and strawberry. 

The  area  of  Pikine,  especially  the  Niayes  Valley,  is  state  property,  and 
therefore  the  producers  in  that  area  can  be  ejected  at  any  time  if  the  state 
decides  to  assert  its  rights.  This  land  insecurity  deters  the  producers  from 
making investments. 

Copyright practicalactionpublishing.com

 

CASE STUDY: PIKINE, SENEGAL  221

Land  is  obtained  through  inheritance,  by  purchasing  it  (although  it  is 
strictly prohibited to sell plots of land in the area, some people sell/buy land, 
knowing that it has no legal value), by renting a plot, or by entering into a 
share-cropping arrangement (métayage). 

Small-scale  urban  agriculture  in  Pikine  area  successfully  contributes  to 
better food security and nutritional status as well as generating income for 
the producing families. Nearly 95 per cent of the producers in the area claim 
that they are able to cover their family’s daily cash needs with the income 
generated by urban agriculture (Dieng, 2004). 

The main actors involved in urban agriculture in the Pikine are depicted in 

Figure 14.1. They include the following:

1.  Direct  stakeholders:  the  1,500  producers  and  their  organizations: 
PROVANIA  and  UPROVAN  (larger  associations  of  several  local  farmer 
groups), Mbou Gayif, Laaw Tann, Ndeck, Daan Doleé, and Feul Yeggo 
(smaller speciﬁ c-purpose organizations), as well as the small merchants, 
larger land holders, agricultural workers, input suppliers, transporters, 
middle men, retailers, etc. 

2.  Institutional  actors:  ministries,  local  government,  and  decentralized 
state  services  (Ministry  of  Agriculture,  City  Of  Pikine,  Commune  of 
Pikine Nord).

3.  The Niayes and Green Zones Development and Protection programme 

(PASDUNES).

4.  NGOs and other non-government supporting organizations (IAGU, Enda 
RUP, ENDA GRAF, ANCAR, ACDEV, CEREX Locustox, etc.) and CAT (the 
IAGU–PROVANIA co-ordination team for the pilot project)

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PASDU
NES  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

ANCAR 

ENDA 
GRAF 

 

ACDEV 

ENDA 
RUP 

 
 

PROVANIA

 
 

Feul 
Yeggo 

 

Agriculture

Ministry 

 of 

 
Commune of 
Pikine Nord

 
 

IAGU 

 

City of  
Pikine 

Mbou 
Gayif 

Laaw 
Tann 

UPROVAN 

  Ndeck

 
Daan 
Doolé 

CEREX 
Locustox

 

CAT  

Figure 14.1 Actors involved in urban agriculture in Pikine

Copyright practicalactionpublishing.com

222  WOMEN FEEDING CITIES

Figure 14.1 shows the various institutions that interact (to a certain extent) 
with  the  (second-level)  farmer  associations  PROVANIA  and  UPROVAN,  and 
the  low  level  of  interaction  between  these  institutions,  which  sometimes 
creates duplication (as well as important gaps) in the implemented activities. 
The Multi-stakeholder Forum on Urban Agriculture that was established as a 
result of the MPAP process provides a platform for the farmer organizations 
to  interact  directly  with  these  institutions  and  provides  better  institutional 
co-ordination. 

The study area
The  formulation  and  implementation  of  the  pilot  project  took  place  in 
North Pikine on 60 ha mainly dedicated to vegetable gardening (and some 
ﬂ oriculture). Some of the actors are engaged in fruit and vegetable processing. 
The majority of plot supervisors are men (72.2 per cent), while 21.8 per cent 
of them are women. Their age range is from 25 to 68 years. As regards land 
occupation, 35.8 per cent are tenants and 52.8 per cent are owners, but only 3.4 
per cent have a title deed (Niang et al., 2005). The main farmers’ organization 
in this area is PROVANIA, which developed the pilot project ‘Establishment of 
a Proper Input and Equipment Supply System for Urban Agricultural Producers 
in Pikine-North’ in co-ordination with IAGU and with the political support of 
the Pikine Municipality.

Field in Pikine-Niayes
By IAGU

Copyright practicalactionpublishing.com

CASE STUDY: PIKINE, SENEGAL  223

 
Analysis of gender in urban agriculture in the area of North Pikine 
Methodology applied
This case study is based on the following components.

1.  A  review  of  available  qualitative  and  quantitative  data  relating  to 

agriculture in the Pikine area, especially:
•  An early case study of gender aspects of urban agriculture in Pikine 

(IAGU, 2004). 

•  A  report  on  the  Exploratory  Study  on  Urban  Agriculture  (IAGU, 
2006) carried out in the framework of the RUAF–Cities Farming for 
the  Future  Programme,  presenting  a  diagnosis  of  the  main  urban 
farming systems and the actors involved, and the main constraints 
and  opportunities  for  development  of  urban  agriculture  in  Pikine 
area, as well as reviews of the actual legal and regulatory framework 
for urban agriculture in Pikine. The study includes a special chapter 
dealing with the gender aspects of urban agriculture. 

•  A study on Access to Credit and Finance for male and female urban 
agricultural producers in the Niayes area (IAGU, 2007). Lack of means 
to  ﬁ nance  their  agricultural  and  marketing  activities  is  one  of  the 
producers’ major constraints, especially for the women.

2.  Focus-group  meetings  with  male  and  female  beneﬁ ciaries  of  the 
above-mentioned pilot project, implemented by PROVANIA with the 
support  of  IAGU–RUAF.  The  aim  of  these  meetings  was  to  check  the 
outcomes  of  the  gender  analysis  contained  in  the  available  literature 
and to discuss to what degree women’s (and men’s) speciﬁ c constraints 
and interests were taken into account in the design and implementation 
of the pilot project. Separate meetings were ﬁ rst held with six female 
producers and ten male producers, followed by a mixed forum (involving 
24 women and nine men). The mixed meeting allowed men and women 
to compare their views on certain issues. During the focus-group meetings 
a number of participatory rapid appraisal tools regarding key issues in 
gender and urban agriculture were applied, including the following
•  A  Venn  diagram  which  highlights  the  way  in  which  communities 
perceive (the importance of the services provided by) local associations 
and external institutions and helps to analyse the existing relationships 
between local organizations and the external institutions. 

•  A pyramid of constraints, which is a tool for ranking the main constraints 

identiﬁ ed by the women involved in market-gardening activities. 

•  A  daily  calendar  of  activities  which  shows  the  gender-differentiated 

distribution of tasks in the farm household. 

•  A  proﬁ le  of  the  access  to  and  control  over  resources,  which  allows 
researchers  to  analyse  the  productive  resources  to  which  men  and 
women have access, and their degree of control over those resources. 

Copyright practicalactionpublishing.com

224  WOMEN FEEDING CITIES

•  A decision-making matrix which makes it possible to understand better 
how men and women take part in the decision making, and in what 
aspects  of  urban  agriculture  men  and  women  respectively  are  the 
main decision makers.

•  A priority-setting diagram, used to identify the priorities of male and 
female producers respectively, and/or their views on the adequacy of 
identiﬁ ed solutions.

In  the  three  focus-group  meetings  we  ﬁ rst  sought  to  establish  a  climate 
of trust in order to make the participants feel comfortable about the use of 
the collected data. Furthermore we applied a tactful approach when dealing 
with socially or culturally sensitive issues (for example, decision making in 
the household), in which we ﬁ rst raised a more general discussion on the issue 
and then slipped in the questions included in the tools one by one. During the 
meetings we had to deal with a lot of chattering and repeated digressions from 
the main subject under discussion, hence the need to be patient and refocus 
the debates on the main issues.

Results of the gender analysis
Distribution of labour
Men  dominate  production  activities,  and  they  normally  manage  most 
activities throughout the season. Women become especially involved when 
it  comes  to  harvesting,  transporting,  processing,  and  especially  marketing. 
Female  heads  of  households  (widows,  unmarried,  or  divorced  women)  hire 
labourers (sourgas) for the production activities. 

Men almost never go to the market to sell their produce. They often sell 
the  produce  on-farm  to  women  who  collect  it  directly  from  the  ﬁ eld  by 
hiring  carriers  to  take  the  vegetable  racks  from  the  ﬁ eld  to  the  main  road, 
and horse carts to bring the production to the markets or processing centre. 
Transportation  costs  are  relatively  high,  which  affects  the  production  costs 
and therefore limits proﬁ ts. The women deplore the absence of access roads 
and insist on the need to have their own means of transportation, given the 
fact that horse-cart owners are often uncooperative. 

Processing of the produce is also mainly done by women’s groups, such as 
Dan Doolé (a Wolof term meaning ‘Working to Earn One’s Living’), which 
is processing cereals, vegetables, and fruits. There are several such groups in 
the area of Pikine which have organized themselves into a network of local 
organizations involved in the processing of agricultural products.

Another of the women’s important roles is ﬁ nancing the purchase of inputs 
needed for the next production season, often using their own money earned 
in the marketing – which is also a way to ensure that the men are selling the 
harvest to them, rather than to outsiders. 

Househ old duties are en tirely perform ed by wom en , som etim es with  th e 
assistan ce of youn g girls. Som e paren ts com pel th eir daugh ters to in terrupt 

Copyright practicalactionpublishing.com

 

CASE STUDY: PIKINE, SENEGAL  225

Table 14.1 Gender division of labour in farm-households in North Pikine
Activity 
Obtaining a piece of land 
Guarding the piece of land 
Preparing ﬁ eld (hoeing) 
Obtaining/purchasing seeds 
Preparing seeds 
Sowing 
Transferring plants 
Weeding 
Localizing water source 
Irrigation 
Fertilization 
Pest control 
Harvesting 
Threshing 
Cleaning 
Storage 
Transporting products to the market 
Selling products at market 
Maintenance (e.g. irrigation system, warehouse) 
Interacting with extension workers/local authorities 
Exchanging information with other producers 
Livestock feeding 
Household chores 
Social/religious ceremonies 
Community-political meetings/roles 

 
x 
 

x 
 
 
 
 
 
 
x 
 
 
 

x
 
 
x 
 
x
x 
x 

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x

x
x

Women/Girls  Men/Boys

x (consults men) 

x (provides the funds) 

x (hires transport)

or  en d  th eir  sch oolin g  in   order  to  assist  th eir  m oth ers  in   th e  dom estic 
ch ores. 

Community  activities  are  essentially  divided  between  family  ceremonies 
(christening,  funerals,  marriages,  circumcision,  etc.)  and  socio-cultural  and 
political  activities  (associative  structures,  political  activities,  community 
activities).  The  entire  family  attends  family  ceremonies;  or,  if  this  is  not 
possible,  one  of  the  spouses  represents  the  other  in  equal  proportions.  In 
all  the  ceremonies,  however,  there  are  so-called  ‘female’  components  (for 
example, the festivities) and others that are more ’masculine’ (for example, 
the religious activities).

Women are more inclined to participate in social and political activities than 
the men. However, they are rarely appointed as community representatives, 
and men dominate all the community authorities.

Access to and control over resources 
Men control most of the resources; only a minority of women have their own 
farms, by virtue of an inheritance. However, lately an increasing number of 
women have access to land resources, by purchasing or renting plots of land. 

Copyright practicalactionpublishing.com

226  WOMEN FEEDING CITIES

Table  14.2  shows  the  predominance  of  men  in  the  distribution  of 
decision-making power. Single female landowners generally make decisions 

Control

Access 

Table 14.2 Access to and control over resources in farm-households in North Pikine
 
 
Productive
resources
Land 

Men  Women  Men  Women  Observations

75 

25 

75 

25  Most  of  the  land  is  used  and  controlled  by  men. 
Women have access to land either by inheriting it or 
by buying it, but do not easily have control over it, 
unless they are single.

25  Husbands often allow their wives to work outside the 
house  with  a  view  to  the  related  economic  gains. 
Widows  and  unmarried  or  divorced  women  have 
complete control over their activities and resources, 
and their male relatives have very little power over 
them. Such women are often involved in women’s 
associations  and  hire  labourers  for  the  production 
activities if they can afford it. 

institutions  especially 

25  Women  have  more  access  to  credit  than  men 
(because  several 
target 
women engaged in small businesses), although both 
men  and  women  judge  it  to  be  insufﬁ cient.  The 
husband is often consulted before a woman takes a 
loan, and men often control its use.
The men buy and control the use of the inputs, but 
it is the women who provide the funds to purchase 
the inputs

25 

25  Most equipment is collectively owned and controlled 
by the organization PROVANIA. Men dominate the 
use of equipment.

25  Women have more training opportunities, especially 
courses  in  product  processing  and  adult  literacy, 
than  men,  but  men  often  have  a  strong  say  in 
whether  their  wives  may  participate  in  a  training 
course or not. 

Labour 

75 

50 

75 

Credit 

25 

75 

75 

Inputs  

75 

25 

75 

Equipment  75 

75 

75 

Training 

25  

50 

75 

Beneﬁ ts
Proﬁ ts 

25 

75 

50 

Ownership 
of  goods 
(e.g. house) 

 
 
 

 
 
 

Community  100  100 
decision 
making 

 
 

 
 

75 
 
 

75 
 
 

Copyright practicalactionpublishing.com

50  Men sell the produce to their wives, who market it, 
and so both get their share of the proﬁ t. However, 
husbands  often  dominate  decisions  on  how  the 
proﬁ ts  will  be  used,  including  proﬁ ts  managed  by 
their wives. 

25  Normally the men are considered the owner of the 
house and other main goods. However, female heads 
 
 
of household can own a house (and land) through 
inheritance. 

25  Women  actively  participate  in  social  and  political 
activities, but decision making is strongly dominated
 
 
by men.

 

CASE STUDY: PIKINE, SENEGAL  227

in  consultation  with  the  hired  farm  labourers,  which  clearly  indicates  the 
dominant position of men in the agricultural production.

Women’s role in decision making
The decision-making power at the household level is strongly related to the 
control over means of production (land, capital, etc.), which are mainly in 
the hands of men, as has been shown above. The women have a much more 
important  role  in  decision  making  when  it  comes  to  marketing  activities, 
transport, and processing. 

When women have the exclusive responsibility for a family (female-headed 
households), social norms allow them more decision-making power. Since the 
number of female-headed households is increasing, nowadays more women 
have gained decision-making power.

At  the  community  level,  women  are  active  participants  in  social  and 
political activities. However, the main decision-making authorities are male. 

A female producer: I have been a widow for 15 years and I have been working on urban 
agriculture for all that period. I am managing a household of 20 people. I manage to feed 
them and deal with all the needs of my kids and the rest of the family, which is made up 
of young women, married or single. To summarize, I can say that I manage to deal with all 
my needs thanks to the income I get from urban agriculture. Most of the female members 
of the association are in charge of families. I have a plot of land that I inherited from my 
father, who had a lease on it. This allows me to exploit the land.
It is important to note that women often are not sufﬁ ciently informed on 
important legal aspects related to agricultural activities, which weakens their 
position in a largely conservative society. The example of the woman quoted 

inﬂ uence 

but the 
men’s 
opinions 
prevail 

Men  Discussions  Equal  Discussions  Women
decide 
decide
alone 
alone

Table 14.3 Decision-making matrix among farm-households in North Pikine (for households 
with husband and wife present)
Activities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Decisions on buying inputs or equipment  x
Decisions on what crops to grow 
 
Decisions on taking a loan  
 
Decision about which part of the harvest
will be consumed or sold 
Decisions on training activities 
Decisions on domestic activities 
Family-planning decisions  
Decisions on socio-political activities  
Decisions on children’s schooling  

but the 
women’s 
opinions
prevail

x
 

 
x
 
 
x
x

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

x

x

 
 

 
x

x

Copyright practicalactionpublishing.com

228  WOMEN FEEDING CITIES

above perfectly illustrates the case, as she was not aware of the fact that when 
her father passed away his death automatically cancelled the lease, and that 
she had to go through some formalities in order to get it renewed.  

Main constraints encountered by male and female producers in North Pikine
During  the  exploratory  survey  in  2006  (IAGU–RUAF,  2006)  two  pyramids 
of  constraints  were  elaborated,  one  by  the  women  and  another  by  the 
men, in order to identify the main constraints encountered by women and 
men respectively in urban agriculture in North Pikine. The most important 
constraints appear at the base of the pyramid, and the less pressing ones at 
the top. 

We observe that a number of problems are seen as priority constraints by 
male  and  female  producers  alike,  notably  insecurity  of  tenure,  shortage  of 
irrigation  water,  and  limited  access  to  credit.  These  are  serious  obstacles  to 
sustainable urban agriculture in North Pikine. According to the agricultural 
producers, agriculture might disappear altogether, under pressure from rapid 
and uncontrolled urbanization and the subsequent building of housings and 
collective facilities. 

We  also  see  some  important  differences  between  the  main  concerns  of 
men and women, with the women being more preoccupied with marketing-
related issues (poor access roads, limited market places, problematic consumer 
relations, etc.) or issues related to their situation as female heads of households 
(paying hired labour); whereas the male producers are more preoccupied by 
production-related  issues  (lack  of  good  seeds,  crop  diseases,  crop  and  soil 

Paying for labour,
especially after
slump in sales

Gaining loyalty of customers

(get them to buy their products

on a regular basis)

Lack of market places to sell their

products (only one market available)

and instability of prices

Limited access to credit to finance the inputs for next

production season

Difficult access to water, compelling them to leave

some land uncultivated

Land-tenure insecurity

Figure 14.2 Pyramid of constraints encountered by female producers in North Pikine

Copyright practicalactionpublishing.com

 

CASE STUDY: PIKINE, SENEGAL  229

Insecure tracks

to the fields

Soil and plant infections

Expensive inputs

Problems in marketing agricultural products

Expensive production equipment

Difficult access to credit to finance the inputs for next

production season

Lack of certified seeds

Insufficient access to water

Land-tenure insecurity

Figure 14.3 Pyramid of constraints encountered by male producers in North Pikine

contamination,  and  the  high  cost  of  equipment  and  inputs).  Women  also 
raise issues related to the employment of paid labour. Problems often occur 
during the production period, when they are faced with difﬁ culties in selling 
their products. 

Priorities of female producers
The female producers from North Pikine involved in the focus-group meetings 
(and the pilot project) suggested a number of measures that could improve 
their activities: 

•  Organize the women involved in marketing in more formal groupings, 
in order to put pressure on the public authorities to create more local 
vegetable markets and to lease these out to them formally.

•  Set up a savings and credit system (mutuelles), shared by the women’s 

groups, to provide loans to the producers. 

•  Provide  more  capacity-building  programmes,  to  enable  women  to 
improve the management of their activities, at organizational, ﬁ nancial, 
and technical levels.

•  Enhance the security of the agricultural lands.
•  Provide motor-pumps to facilitate access to water resources and increase 

the value of non-cultivated plots of land. 

•  Assist the female land owners to shift to a share-cropping system so that 

they can avoid the problems related to the use of paid labour.

•  Improve  the  transport  of  the  products  from  the  ﬁ elds  by  creating/
improving access tracks and re-organizing the plots in such a way that 
all plots can be reached.

Copyright practicalactionpublishing.com

230  WOMEN FEEDING CITIES
Review of the pilot project in the light of the gender analysis 
Drawing  on  the  results  of  the  exploratory  survey  implemented  in  2006 
(IAGU–RUAF, 2006) the pilot project was focused on the main obstacles to 
the development of urban agriculture mentioned by both men and women. 
Accordingly the following objectives were chosen.

1.  Enhancing security of land use by developing a plan for the regularization 
of agricultural lands, especially in depression zones and areas with high 
ecological value. These should be designated as permanent agricultural 
zones (where construction is prohibited) in the city development and 
land-use plans. The plan will be discussed in the Pikine Multi-stakeholder 
Platform on Urban Agriculture and subsequently presented to the Pikine 
City Council. 

2.  Enhancing access to irrigation water by providing the farmers’ organization 
PROVANIA with a pump and irrigation equipment and establishing a 
savings scheme to pay for its maintenance and replacement. (A planned 
scheme for safe reuse of wastewater had to be postponed, due to some 
problems with a key institution involved in its implementation.)

3.  Enhancing access to good-quality inputs by setting up a system managed 
by PROVANIA for collective purchase of seeds and tools/equipment and 
their  provision  to  the  producers  on  credit  (inputs)  or  on  hire  (tools/
equipment).

So, with the results of the gender analysis now in hand, what can be said 
about the gender responsiveness of this pilot project? During the preparation 
of  the  project,  an  attempt  was  clearly  made  to  understand  the  roles  and 
contributions of men and women in urban agricultural production, processing, 
and marketing, before designing the project. The project also involved male 
and female producers in making decisions about the objectives of the project, 
resulting in a focus on issues that were identiﬁ ed by male as well as female 
producers as key constraints limiting the development of urban agriculture. 
During implementation, equal access of male and female producers to inputs 
and  equipment  supplied  by  the  project  through  PROVANIA  was  ensured. 
By doing so, the role of women in the production activities, their access to 
resources, and their participation in PROVANIA have improved.     

But we also observe that the pilot project will beneﬁ t mainly women who 
control some land themselves (since they are more involved in production, 
can  become  members  of  PROVANIA,  and  have  a  share  in  the  distribution 
of inputs and equipment). But there are only a few women in this category 
(mainly  single  women  who  have  inherited  some  land).  An  important 
constraint indicated by these women, their problems with hiring/paying male 
farm labour, has not received attention. Another problem is that the project 
design neglects the fact that the women’s main roles in urban agriculture are 
in the organization of transport, processing, and marketing of the products, 
and only to a minor extent – and in a secondary role – in the production. The 

Copyright practicalactionpublishing.com

 

CASE STUDY: PIKINE, SENEGAL  231

project focuses more on production aspects (dominated by the men) and gives 
little  attention  to  the  transport,  processing,  and  marketing  aspects  (which 
are  of  equal  importance  to  the  men,  since  they  sell  their  produce  through 
the women and receive from them the ﬁ nancial means required to buy the 
required inputs). Priority constraints and interests that are speciﬁ c to women 
and  mainly  related  to  processing  and  marketing  (better  access  roads,  more 
market places, better organization of trading women and their access to sources 
of ﬁ nancing, more capacity building related to marketing and processing, etc.) 
were left unaddressed. 

The way forward
PROVANIA is now taking up the above-mentioned issues in the context of the 
Multi-stakeholder Platform on Urban Agriculture, identifying the institutional 
actors who can contribute to solving these issues. For example:

•  Efforts are made by the Pikine municipality to provide speciﬁ c places in 
the city markets for women to sell products from urban agriculture. The 
municipality also provides better facilities (especially credit) for female 
vegetable traders through a municipal funding project.

•  The credit institution PAMECAS is experimenting with a new ﬁ nancial 
tool for urban agriculture, speciﬁ cally women involved in the processing 
and marketing of vegetables and other products.

•  The Strategic Action Plan on Urban Agriculture developed by the Multi-
stakeholder Forum gives explicit attention to gender issues; and several 
institutions, when planning actions, are now taking into consideration 
the speciﬁ c constraints, opportunities, and beneﬁ ts for men and women 
involved in urban agriculture.

In the design of a follow-up project by PROVANIA, the speciﬁ c interests 
of women involved in processing and marketing of agricultural produce will 
be given more attention. A gender expert working with National Agency for 
Agricultural Development and Rural is providing advice to PROVANIA.

Main lessons learned
The  main  lessons  from  the  process  of  integrating  gender  in  this  urban 
agriculture project are as follows:

•  It is essential to demonstrate to all parties the crucial value of women’s 
contribution to the agricultural production and marketing process and 
the income that it generates. The participatory diagnosis clearly showed 
the important role that women play in pre-ﬁ nancing the new season, in 
the production process during peak labour periods, and especially in the 
(organization of) transport, processing, and marketing of the products.

Copyright practicalactionpublishing.com

232  WOMEN FEEDING CITIES

•  It  is  important  to  resist  the  tendency  to  focus  diagnosis  and  project 
formulation  on  production-related  aspects.  Processing  and  marketing 
aspects should be given equal attention. 

•  It is important that, during the formulation of a local project, male and 
female  producers  can  independently  formulate  their  priority  interests 
and preferred actions, and that they jointly conclude which actions will 
be included in the project. Although initially the men still may dominate 
the ﬁ nal prioritization (as was the case in the PROVANIA project), such 
procedure  establishes  the  mechanism  that  women’s  speciﬁ c  interests 
are explicitly taken into account and that men accept and support the 
implementation of related actions. 

•  A gender-sensitive situation analysis does not automatically ensure that 
a project will be designed to serve the main interests of women. Gender-
responsive planning and monitoring requires more attention. Gender 
mainstreaming is to be understood as a repetitive process which results 
in small steps forward during each phase of the process. 

•  To tackle priority issues regarding gender in urban agriculture requires 
complementary actions by various institutions. The Multi-stakeholder 
Platforms on urban agriculture and food security can play an important 
intermediary and co-ordinating role. 

•  Tools used in the diagnosis stage (like the access to/control of resources 
tool, the decision-making matrix, and the distribution of beneﬁ ts map) 
can be effectively used in the implementation stage to monitor gender-
differentiated  distribution  of  participation  in  decision  making  and 
distribution of beneﬁ ts of a project. 

References 
ANSD (2004) Situation Économique et Sociale de Dakar, Agence Nationale de la 
Statistique et de la Démographie, ANSD, Dakar.
Dieng,  M  (2004)  La  viabilité  ﬁ nancière  des  exploitations  agricoles  dans  la  zone 
des Niayes de Pikine (mémoire de ﬁ n d’étude pour l’obtention du Diplôme 
d’Ingénieur des travaux en Planiﬁ cation Économique et en Conseiller en 
Gestion des Organisations), École Nationale d’Économie Appliquée (ENEA), 
Dakar. 
IAGU  (2004)  Genre  et  agriculture  urbaine  dans  la  vallée  des  Niayes  de  Pikine 
(Sénégal), Étude de cas Exploratoire, IAGU-RUAF, Dakar. 
IAGU (2006) Rapport de l’étude exploratoire sur l’agriculture urbaine dans la ville 
de Pikine (Sénégal), IAGU–RUAF, Dakar. 
IAGU (2007) Le ﬁ nancement des agriculteurs et agricultrices urbains de la zone des 
Niayes. Étude de Cas, IAGU, Dakar. 
IAGU–RUAF (2006) ‘Synthese du rapport de l’etude exploratoire sur l’agriculture 
urbaine dans la ville de Pikine (Senegal)’, IAGU, Dakar.
MUAT (2003) Plan  directeur  d’urbanisme  de  Dakar  horizon  2005, Direction de 
l’urbanisme et de l’architecture, AUS-BCEOM, Dakar.

Copyright practicalactionpublishing.com

 

CASE STUDY: PIKINE, SENEGAL  233

MUAT (2004) Élaboration du plan directeur d’aménagement et de sauvegarde des 
niayes et zones vertes de Dakar. Programme d’actions pour la sauvegarde et le 
développement urbain des Niayes, Rapport sur les études diagnostiques, Direction 
des Espaces Verts Urbains/DDH Ltée/Cabinet Prestige/GEOI, Dakar.
Niang, S. et al. (2005) Treatment of Health Risks Linked to the Use of Waste Water 
in Urban Agriculture, (Dakar –Senegal), IFAN–ENDA RUP, Dakar.

About the authors
Gora Gaye is Project Manager at the African Institute for Urban Management 
(IAGU), Dakar, Senegal.
Mamadou  Ndong  Touré  is  Geographer  for  the  Cabinet  d’Architecture  et 
d’Urbanisme du Sénégal (CAUS), Dakar, Senegal.

Copyright practicalactionpublishing.com

