Advanced Materials Research Vols. 955-959 (2014) pp 3864-3868
© (2014) Trans Tech Publications, Switzerland
doi:10.4028/www.scientific.net/AMR.955-959.3864

All rights reserved. No part of contents of this paper may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means without the written permission of TTP,
www.ttp.net. (ID: 159.226.110.22-12/06/14,08:35:22)

 Detection of Rice Distribution Using NDVI Time-series Similarity Measure Xudong Guan1, a, Chong Huang2,b* and Gaohuan Liu3,c  1College of Population, Resources and Environment, Shandong Normal University, Jinan, Shandong, 250014, China 2State Key Laboratory of Resources and Environmental Information System, Institute of Geographic Sciences and Natural Resources Research, Beijing, 100101, China 3State Key Laboratory of Resources and Environmental Information System, Institute of Geographic Sciences and Natural Resources Research, Beijing, 100101, China aguanxd@lreis.ac.cn, bhuangch@lreis.anc.cn, cliugh@lreis.ac.cn Keywords: DTW, MODIS NDVI, Paddy field, Mekong Delta, Remote Sensing.  Abstract. Rice cultivation is essential for agricultural production in Mekong Delta. Rice production estimation is based on the measurement of paddy field area and plantation system. Detection of paddy rice area and the plantation system is significant to food security decision. Based on the MODIS NDVI time-series data and the Dynamic Time Wrapping (DTW) similarity measure we detected the single and multiple rice distribution in Mekong Delta in 2010. Firstly, a combination of replacement and filter method was applied to denoising the MODIS NDVI time-series. Secondly, extracted the standard NDVI time-series cycle of single and multiple rice on MODIS NDVI time-series image. Thirdly, compare each pixel’s NDVI time-series cycle with each standard NDVI time-series cycle based on DTW distance. Finally, choose threshold in DTW distance and determine paddy rice’s distribution. Results were examined by sampling point and high resolution image of Mekong Delta; it shows that the extraction accuracy is 86%, relatively high for MODIS data classification outcome. Introduction Food security is the most important issue faced by many countries. Mekong Delta is the most important agricultural production base in Vietnam and the main crop are paddy rice. According to statistical data (Le Van Thinh, 2009) rice area in Mekong Delta accounts over 50% of the Vietnamese total rice cropping area. Double and triple cropping rice accounts over 80% of Mekong Delta’s total rice cropping. Monitoring the distribution of multi-rice in Mekong Delta is significant for food security in Vietnam and other major rice importing countries.  Terra/Aqua satellite’s low revisiting period makes MODIS data high temporal resolution. Time-series data for Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) derived from MODIS data was widely used for monitoring seasonal changes in vegetation activity and crop phenology over wide areas [1]. Temporal signatures of remotely sensed vegetation indices provide one basis for image classification; J.P. Evans and R. Geerken present a classification technique based on the DFT of annual cycle of MODIS NDVI data [2]; Using MODIS time-series data, X. Xiao proposed an effective method of mapping paddy rice in South and Southeast Asia based on the rice’s characteristic in irrigation period [3]. Applying similarity measure of NDVI-cycles to classify vegetation type fully exploited the biophysical information contained in NDVI time series [4]. Date and length of each phenology stage of rice are variable in Mekong Delta. DTW algorithm could correct the phase shift from the object cycle to standard cycle and optimal to application of NDVI cycle’s similarity comparison. Focusing on paddy rice area extraction using DTW based NDVI similarity measure. The extraction accuracy is 86%, relatively high for MODIS classification. Advanced Materials Research Vols. 955-959

3865

 Data and Methods Study Area. The Mekong Delta (104°27'E-106°48'E, 8°34'N-11°2'N) is located in the southernmost of Vietnam. The total size of the study area is approximately 40,000 km2. Lower Mekong River combined with nine waterways flow into south sea of China and formed the alluvial plain of Mekong Delta. The Mekong Delta is wide and flat plain characterized by extensive by sedimentation at the mouths of the Mekong and Bassac rivers [5]. Mekong Delta is located in the centroid of Asian tropical monsoon region. Seasonal changes in precipitation caused by the monsoon divides the year into well defined dry and wet seasons, caused by southwest monsoon from Pacific Ocean, the rainy season lasting from May to October; Dry season was caused by northeast monsoon from Eurasia and lasting from November to the following April. The optimal climate and plentitude precipitation allows Mekong Delta to be the economical center of South Vietnam and important agricultural production region of Vietnam. Data. MODIS data: MODIS data were downloaded from LAADS Web. We use the surface reflection 8-day composite level3 global product MOD09A1 data V005 from 2008 to 2012. The spatial resolution is 500m and the temporal resolution is relatively high enough for DTW algorithm comparison. Each pixel was 8-day composit optimal L2G observation data. The first band and second band in the HDF data that represent for red and near-infrared spectrum was used to calculate NDVI, the SDS-QA data contained in the HDF data was separated using LDOPE tools. 2008-2009 and 2011-2012 MODIS NDVI time series data were used for replacement of cloud contaminant pixels in 2010 data. Sampling and Validation data: The sampling pixel which represent typical crop growth cycle. Sampling pixel should gurantee purely one type of crop in the pixel. We aquired 54 verify points of vegetation types during filed survey in march, 2013, including 36 paddy rice points and 18 other land cover types points. 312 verify point were aquired from Google high resolution image, including 257 paddy rice points and 55 other land cover types points.  Method. Reconstruct NDVI Time-series: Heavy cloud in rainy season of the study area contaminated MODIS image seriously. Assuming that land use type was not change in recent years. To keep the integrity of NDVI time-series, we use the same time phase’s cloud free NDVI value in recent years replacing the contaminated pixel’s NDVI value of 2010 and smooth the cycle using S-G filtering. S-G filtering is a simplified least squares-fit convolution for smoothing and computing derivatives of a set of consecutive values. The general equation of the simplified least-squares convolution for NDVI time-series smoothing can be present as Eq. 1:  .                                                                                                                                   (1) In Eq.1, Y is the origin NDVI value, Y*is the resultant NDVI value, Ci is the coefficient for the ith NDVI value of the filter (smoothing window), and N is the number of convoluting integer and is equal to the smoothing window (2m+1). The index j is the running index of the original ordinate data table [6]. Standard NDVI cycle: Single and multi-rice in study region is defined by a reference NDVI cycle. Picked 26 points of pure rice pixels from filed survey verify points and 93 pure rice pixels from Google Earth high resolution remote sensing image. We extracted 2 typical single cropping rice growing NDVI cycle, 5 typical double cropping  rice growing NDVI cycle and 8 typical triple cropping rice growing NDVI cycle. NDVI Similarity Measurement: Crop phonological stages are not fixed, planting date depend on rainfall condition. Irrigated rice’s planting date is variable. Length of each phonological stage is variance due to geographical factors and cropping variety. The DTW algorithm [7] is suitable for NDVI cycle similarity measurement. Fig.1 shows a situation present how DTW correct phase shift of 3866

Advances in Environmental Technologies III

 the triple cropping rice. NDVI2 cycle’s plant date was later than the NDVI1 cycle, but using DTW distance similarity measurement, this two NDVI cycle is basically the same type.  Fig.1 DTW distance similarity measure on NDVI cycles Paddy rice extraction: The DTW distance of every pixel to each Standard NDVI Cycle was calculated and the same type of rice was minimizing composited into a single DTW distance image, single and multi-rice’s DTW distance shows in Fig. 2. It is acknowledged in DTW algorithm that NDVI cycle shape were more similar when the DTW distance shorter. By interactive examination the NDVI time series and the ground truth data, we determined the DTW distance threshold to extract single cropping rice and multiple cropping rice. A cutting off threshold of DTW distance 4.3 was applied to each pixel in the DTW distance results. Pixels with DTW distance of a crop type over 4.3 were considered unlikely to be the dominant crop type in the extent of the pixel. Overlaid pixel of low DTW distance within threshold value was caused by existence of mixed pixel, and we determine the pixel’s type with the lowest DTW distance’s crop type.  Fig. 2 DTW Distance of Single and Multiple Cropping Rice Results and Discussion Results Analysis. Distribution of paddy rice was shown in Fig. 3, Single cropping rice area is 4561.9km2, Double cropping rice area is 10043.1km2 and Triple cropping rice area is 9740.6 km2. The total paddy rice area is 24345.6 km2. Advanced Materials Research Vols. 955-959

3867

  Fig. 3 Distribution of Single and Multiple Rice Results Validation. 28 filed survey points include 10 rice points and 18 other land cover type and 219 extraction points from Google Earth high resolution image include 164 rice points and 55 other land cover type was applied to results validation. The distribution of validate point was shown in fig. 4. Among 174 rice validation points, 152 points were correctly classified. Among the 73 other land cover type validation points, 15 points were correctly classified. Overall, 35 points were incorrect classified and 212 points were classified correctly. Classification accuracy is 86%.  Fig.4 Validation Points Distribution Discussion. On the basis of the variance of planting date and length each phenology stage of rice cropping in Southeast Asian area, we applied the DTW algorithm which was usually applied in speech recognition, pattern recognition and text recognition, to NDVI cycle similarity measure. The major problem we met was the cloud contaminated image in study area, in this study, we use the best NDVI time-series’ pixels in 2008-2012 to present NDVI time-series of 2010. To the nullity pixels in 2008-2012, we applied the single phase replacement method to reconstruct NDVI time-series, but this caused the problem of NDVI cycle distortion caused by annual variation of the planting system. Rice planting is Contiguous in Mekong Delta, and the medium-resolution data MODIS09A1 is suitable for 3868

Advances in Environmental Technologies III

 rice distribution detection in Mekong Delta. NDVI time-series similarity measurement application to classify crop type are proved success, the results of single and multi-rice distribution are credible. Acknowledgements We gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the Key Research Programme of the Chinese Academy of Sciences [grant no. KZZD-EW-08], Key Project for the ‘One-Three-Five’ Strategic Planning in IGSNRR [grant no. 2012SJ008], Special Programme for National Science and Technology Basic Research [grant no. 2008FY110300]. References [1] T.Sakamoto, M.Yokozawa, H.Toritani, et al. A crop phenology detection method using time-series MODIS data. Remote Sensing of Environment. Vol. 96 (2005), p. 366-374 [2] J.P. Evans, R. Geerken: Classifying rangeland vegetation type and coverage using a Fourier component based similarity measure. Remote Sensing of Environment. Vol. 105 (2006), p. 1-8 [3] X. Xiao, S. Boles, et al. Mapping paddy rice agriculture in South and Southeast Asia using multi-temporal MODIS images. Remote Sensing of Environment. Vol. 100 (2006), p. 95-113 [4] R. Geerken, B. Zaitchik and J. Evans: Classifying rangeland vegetation type and coverage from NDVI time series using Fourier Filtered Cycle Similarity. International Journal of Remote Sensing. Vol. 26 (2005), p. 5535-5554 [5] T. Sakamoto, N. Nguyen, et al. Spatial-temporal distribution of rice phenology and cropping systems in the Mekong Delta with special reference to the seasonal water flow of the Mekong and Bassac rivers. Remote Sensing of Environment. Vol. 100 (2006), p. 1-16 [6] J. Chen, P. Jonsson, et al. A simple method for reconstructing a high-quality NDVI time-series data set based on the Savitzky-Golay filter. Remote Sensing of Environment. Vol. 91 (2004), p. 332-344 [7] S. Chu, E. Keogh, et al. Iterative Deepening Dynamic Time Warping for Time Series. Proceedings of the 2002 SIAM International Conference on Data Mining. p. 195-212 