Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Agricultural Systems 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/agsy 

Exploring opportunities for diversification of smallholders' rice-based 
farming systems in the Senegal River Valley 
Antoine Brosseau a, Kazuki Saito b, Pepijn A.J. van Oort c, Mandiaye Diagne b, Diego Valbuena d, 
Jeroen C.J. Groot a,e,f,* 
a Farming Systems Ecology, Wageningen University & Research, P.O. Box 430, 6700 AK Wageningen, the Netherlands 
b Africa Rice Center (AfricaRice), 01 B.P. 2551, Bouak´e 01, Cˆote d'Ivoire 
c Agrosystems Research, Wageningen Plant Research, the Netherlands 
d Land Use Planning, Wageningen University & Research, P.O. Box 47, 6700 AA Wageningen, the Netherlands 
e Bioversity International, Development Impact Unit, Viale dei Tre Denari, 472/a, 00054 Maccarese, Fiumicino, Italy 
f International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center (CIMMYT), Sustainable Intensification Program, Carretera M´exico-Veracruz, Km. 45, El Bat´an, 56237 Texcoco, 
Mexico   

H I G H L I G H T S  
• Farmers  in  Senegal  River  Valley  out-
lined  their  objectives  and  cropping 
practices. 
• Farmers  sought  to  combine  rice  culti-
vation  with  high-value 
vegetable 
cropping. 
• Vegetable  crops  were  more  profitable 
than 
labour 
demanding. 
• Trade-offs  existed  between  profit  vs. 
reduction  of 
labour  burden  and 
pollution. 
• Farmers'  choices  were  influenced  by 
external drivers of policies and services.  

rice,  but  also  more 

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

Editor: Mark van Wijk  

Keywords: 
Rice intensification 
Crop diversification 
Smallholder farmers 
Modelling 
West Africa 

G R A P H I C A L  A B S T R A C T  

A B S T R A C T    
CONTEXT: Policy-based or technological interventions are more likely to be effective if aligned with farmers' 
objectives, constraints, and decision-making processes. 
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to explore trade-offs and synergies of farming systems in response to 
innovative rice cultivation activities by understanding current farming systems, main drivers impacting farm 
management and farmers' perspectives on rice intensification. Understanding these interrelations is key in rice 
production areas, where smallholder farmers largely depend on growing rice to subsist. 
METHODS: A rapid system analysis was conducted interviewing 20 farmers in 4 villages along the Senegal River 
Valley (SRV) to obtain a general view on farm functioning and farmers' perspectives on farming systems. A 
detailed system analysis with four farmers was subsequently conducted to provide an insight into the underlying 
processes  regulating  farm  management.  A  multi-objective  optimization  model  was  used  to  quantitatively 

* Corresponding author at: Farming Systems Ecology, Wageningen University & Research, P.O. Box 430, 6700 AK Wageningen, the Netherlands. 

E-mail address: jeroen.groot@wur.nl (J.C.J. Groot).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2021.103211 
Received 2 March 2021; Received in revised form 15 June 2021; Accepted 21 June 2021   

AgriculturalSystems193(2021)103211Availableonline26June20210308-521X/©2021TheAuthors.PublishedbyElsevierLtd.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBYlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).A. Brosseau et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

evaluate  and  explore  farm  performances  based  on  four  selected  indicators  representing:  rice  production, 
household agricultural profit, household labour and farm nutrient balance. 
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study showed that government programmes and farmers' 
Unions were strongly influencing farmers' decision-making in agricultural production. Farmers also reported that 
although rice was still essential for their livelihoods, there were transitions towards less rice production in the 
wet season with short duration rice varieties and more vegetable production. Both farmers' interviews and the 
modelling results suggested that farmers would be unlikely to increase or even maintain the area of rice double 
cropping, which has been strongly promoted by the Senegalese government. Instead, farmers would rather keep 
investing in vegetable production. 
SIGNIFICANCE: This modelling study shows the consequences of policy-based and technological interventions for 
farming systems and may inform both policy makers and farmers in situations where objectives are strongly 
divergent. Hence, modelling outcomes may be used to inspire discussion and innovation in order to align the 
government priority of ensuring national food security and farmers' objectives and constraints in the SRV.   

1. Introduction 

Agricultural  interventions,  whether  policies  or  technological  in-
novations, can become more effective and sustainable if aligned with 
farmers' objectives, constraints and decision-making processes (Ajayi 
et al., 2007; Meijer et al., 2014). This alignment is particularly pressing 
in rice-based agricultural regions where recent food crises, increasing 
agricultural input costs, climate change and growing water scarcity ask 
for viable sustainable rice production methods (Djaman et al., 2017; 
Krupnik et al., 2012a; Seck et al., 2013). A particular example is Senegal, 
where rice is the staple food for millions of people (Tanaka et al., 2015) 
but still national  rice production has  been insufficient  to meet con-
sumption needs, which are expected to increase further in the coming 
decades (Saito et al., 2015b; Seck et al., 2013). As the national popu-
lation  increases  and  the  economic  transformation  of  Senegal  keeps 
evolving (Van den Broeck and Maertens, 2017), the Senegalese gov-
ernment still seeks to increase rice production levels to achieve national 
rice self-sufficiency, in particular promoting the expansion of the area 
under irrigated rice cultivation by providing new land and using existing 
land for double cropping (MAER, 2014). Since rice is produced almost 
exclusively by smallholder farmers, increasing rice production is crucial 
to ensure food security while enhancing rural livelihoods (Krupnik et al., 
2012b; Tanaka et al., 2015). 
Although the Senegal River Valley (SRV) is the major rice production 
area in the country, where the cereal is only grown in irrigated lowland 
systems, smallholder farmers still face many challenges to intensify rice 
production. Despite innovative opportunities and agricultural initiatives 
towards rice intensification promoted in the region, there is a substantial 
gap between attainable and actual yields obtained by smallholders in 
irrigated lowland rice production systems (Tanaka et al., 2015; van Oort 
et al., 2016). In the wet season, the delay in rice sowing dates has been 
identified as the major cause of the yield gap, increasing the risk of 
spikelet sterility caused by low temperatures at the end of the growing 
season (Tanaka et al., 2015). This delay has been attributed to late credit 
allocation, limited availability of machinery, suboptimal decisions on 
timing of irrigation (Krupnik et al., 2012b; Poussin et al., 2006; Poussin 
et al., 2005; Tanaka et al., 2015), inappropriate fertilizer applications 
and bird damage (Tanaka et al., 2015). These are persistent issues that 
highlight  the existence of  barriers in institutional arrangements and 
underlying  social  interactions  surrounding  smallholder  farmers  that 
directly affect their decisions and farm functioning (Diagne et al., 2013; 
Poussin et al., 2005; Soullier and Moustier, 2018; Tanaka et al., 2015). 
Consequently, from 2003 to 2016, the rice cultivation period shifted 
from wet to dry season, and farmers often prefer short duration rice 
varieties over medium duration varieties because the yield gain of a 
medium duration variety is insufficient to offset the extra cultivation 
costs (Busetto et al., 2019; van Oort et al., 2016). Concurrently, culti-
vation of vegetables, such as onion and tomato, during the cool dry 
season has been widely adopted in the valley due to their profitability 
(Tanaka et al., 2015). Some farmers even give priority to vegetable 
cultivation over timely sowing of rice (Krupnik et al., 2012b; van Oort 

et al., 2016). The opportunities to diversify farm production and in-
crease crop profitability are important criteria that guide farmers' de-
cisions (Ellis, 2000; van Oort et al., 2016). 
Previous studies in the SRV have mostly focused on constraints and 
opportunities for rice production with little to no attention for growing 
other crops, livestock husbandry or understanding decision-making at 
the farm and household levels (Diagne et al., 2013; Haefele et al., 2002a; 
Krupnik et al., 2012b; Poussin et al., 2006; Poussin et al., 2005; Tanaka 
et al., 2015; van Oort et al., 2016). Multi-objective optimizations using 
computational models are well suited to explore trade-offs and synergies 
within farming systems in response to multiple innovative farming goals 
and  options  (Groot  et  al.,  2012)  across  diverse  smallholder  regions 
(Cortez-Arriola et al., 2014; Estrada-Carmona et al., 2020; Flores-San-
chez et al., 2011; Naudin et al., 2015; Naudin et al., 2012; Paul et al., 
2015). On the other hand, multi-objective studies have been conducted 
in the SRV to assess irrigation scheme performances but such studies at 
farm-system level are lacking (García-Bola˜nos et al., 2011; van Oort 
et al., 2016). The objective of this study was to analyse whether farmers 
are faced with conflicting objectives on farm and that what extent their 
room to manoeuvre is limited or expanded by availability of on- and off- 
farm resources (including services) and policy drivers. Therefore, we 
explored trade-offs and synergies among socio-economic and environ-
mental  farm  performance  indicators  as  affected  by  innovative  rice 
cultivation  activities  on  the  basis  of  a  characterization  of  current 
farming  systems,  and  we  analysed  the  main  drivers  impacting  farm 
management and the farmers' perspectives in rice intensification in the 
SRV. To achieve this, farmers' interviews were conducted and options 
for reconfiguration of cropping and farming systems were generated 
with a Pareto-based multi-dimensional optimization. This allowed us to 
explore the opportunity spaces for farm innovation, which were related 
to the socio-institutional room to manoeuvre. 
2. Methods 
2.1. Study area 

This study was conducted in two districts of the SRV region of Saint- 
Louis, Senegal (Fig. 1). Diama, in the west, is a municipality of Ndiaye 
district in the department of Dagana. The district is representative of the 
delta of the SRV (Tanaka et al., 2015), and Fanaye is a municipality of 
Thill´e Boubacar which is a district in the department of Podor and is 
representative of the middle valley of the SRV (van Oort et al., 2016). 
The main vegetation of this region has been classified as woody steppe 
dominated  by  species  of  the  genera  Acacia  and  Commiphora  (Keay, 
1959). The climate is referred to as a Sahelian type, with three differ-
entiated seasons: humid and hot (locally called the Wet Season, WS, 
about 200 mm rainfall) from July to October, dry and cool (Cool Dry 
Season, CDS) from November to February, dry and hot (Hot Dry Season, 
HDS) from March to June (Haefele et al., 2002b). In Diama, tempera-
tures range from 11 ◦C to 44 ◦C (De Vries et al., 2011) and main soil type 
is Orthithionic Gleysol, with high salinity due to marine salt deposits in 

AgriculturalSystems193(2021)1032112A. Brosseau et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
the subsoil, allowing rice production while limiting vegetable cropping 
(Haefele et al., 2004; Haefele et al., 2002b). In Fanaye, temperatures 
range from 8 ◦C to 46 ◦C (De Vries et al., 2011), while the main soil type 
is Eutric Vertisol with a low or absent natural soil salinity, allowing rice- 
vegetable farming systems (Haefele et al., 2004, Haefele et al., 2002b). 
Most irrigation schemes have been developed on heavy clay and silty 
clay soils (Tanaka et al., 2015). 

2.2. Farm selection 

Two  villages  were  selected  in  each  district:  Pont-Gendarme  and 
Boundoum-Barrage in Diama, and Ndierba and Fanaye-Di´eri in Fanaye. 
These were contrasting villages that included part of the SRV diversity in 
terms of cropping systems, landscapes, and soil type. In each selected 
village, five farmers were randomly selected and interviewed for the 
rapid system analysis. Subsequently, one farmer was selected per village 
to conduct a detailed analysis at farm level. The small number of farms 
allowed to describe farm functioning in detail, but no statistical analyses 
were conducted because of the small number of interviewed farmers and 
their diversity in terms of location, household head age and level of 
education,  household  size,  income  sources,  farm  area,  cultivation 
choices, type of financing and rice self-sufficiency. 

environment  and  farmers'  opinions;  and  (5)  farmers'  objectives  (see 
Table  S1  in  Supplementary  Material).  This  rapid  survey  was  com-
plemented with transect walks with farmers and technicians to observe 
variations in landscape and soil type, and to obtain an insight on access 
to infrastructure for transport and communication. Secondary data was 
also  used  to  complement  and  corroborate  the  main  findings  of  the 
farmers'  interviews.  The  farmers'  objectives  noted  during  interviews 
were selected as indicators to measure farm performances in the sub-
sequent step of detailed system analysis. 
2.3.2. Detailed system analysis 
From the initial group of twenty farmers, one per village was selected 
to participate in the detailed system analysis. Criteria to select these 
farmers were their location, ability to speak French to avoid translation 
bias, and farm specificity (e.g. farm size, self-financing capacity, crop-
ping system). All interviews were conducted by the first author (Bros-
seau). Structured interviews were conducted in December 2017 about 
four main components: (1) household labour management; (2) cropping 
systems and management; (3) livestock production system and man-
agement; and (4) farm economics (see Table S2 in Supplementary Ma-
terial). Farmers' fields were visited, and visual soil assessments were 
conducted to characterize soil quality (Shepherd, 2000). 

2.3. Farming system characterization 

2.4. Farm modelling and multi-objective optimization 

This study followed a two-step analysis (c.f., Flores-Sanchez et al., 
2011). A rapid analysis to obtain both a general view on major drivers 
influencing  farm  management,  and  an  overall  description  of  farm 
functioning  and  the  farmers'  situation,  objectives,  and  perspectives. 
Based on the first step, a more detailed system analysis was conducted to 
provide an insight in agronomic and socio-economic indicators at field 
and  farm  level,  and  in  the  underlying  processes  regulating  farm 
management. 
2.3.1. Rapid system analysis 
In this step, 20 farmers were interviewed in November 2017. All 
interviews were conducted by the first author (Brosseau) and a trans-
lator  who  translated  from  Wolof  to  French.  Interviews  had  both  a 
structural  and  semi-structural  component.  The structural  component 
comprised questions on: (1) household structure and situation; and (2) 
farming system functioning. The semi-structured component included 
questions on: (3) perceived problems and key assets; (4) socio-economic 

Based on the detailed farmers' survey, the FarmDESIGN model was 
calibrated to quantitatively evaluate the performances of the selected 
farms  (Groot  et  al.,  2012).  The  model  quantifies  farm  production, 
nutrient  flows  and  cycles  and  economic  profits.  We  used  the  initial 
typical farms information to generate alternative farm configurations 
that could optimize conservation and production. Inputs required for the 
model describe the biophysical environment, socioeconomics (produc-
tion costs for activities and labour), type and crop products (agronomic 
inputs and outputs), herd composition and products (production costs 
and outputs), manure types and degradation rates, external sources of 
mineral nutrients (through animal food or fertilizers) and physical as-
sets. A static farm balance model calculates a large range of indicators 
pertaining to nutrient and organic matter flows and balances, herd feed 
consumption and energy and protein balance, the manure balance, la-
bour balance and economic results. The model can be freely downloaded 
from https://fse.models.gitlab.io/COMPASS/FarmDESIGN/. 
The model uses an evolutionary algorithm to generate alternative 

Fig. 1. Location of the study areas on the map of the region of Saint-Louis, Senegal.  

AgriculturalSystems193(2021)1032113A. Brosseau et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
configurations of agricultural production systems by adjusting land-use 
areas and inputs (crops, animals, manures, fertilizers, herbicides), and 
evaluating the  responses of  selected indicators. The aim  of a  multi- 
objective optimization is to create alternative farm configurations with 
respect to a selected set of farm parameters and objectives. It employs a 
Pareto-based Differential Evolution algorithm (Groot et al., 2012; Groot 
et al., 2010), which allows to explore the trade-offs between productive, 
socio-economic,  and  environmental  performance  indicators  that  are 
formulated  as objectives. Four  objectives  were defined based  on  in-
terviews with farmers and expert knowledge:  

Rice bran and husk from the paddy rice saved for self-consumption 
were fed to animals. The whole broken rice was self-consumed. In the 
model  a  constraint  was  set  allowing  the  household  level  rice  self- 
sufficiency to increase, but not to decrease compared with the current 
situation. Tomato, okra, and onion bulbs were the only vegetable crop 
products, and were assumed to be totally exported from the farms. 
Animal  production  was  also  considered  in  the  model.  The  feed 
evaluation system was based on animal dry matter intake capacity, and 
requirements  of  metabolizable  energy  (ME), crude  protein (CP)  and 
fibrous material for ruminants. The feed balance was calculated for the 
whole year without distinction between seasons, since no major differ-
ences in feeding strategies were observed during dry and rainy seasons. 
Animals were either located in an open yard or were grazing off-farm. 
Animal physical features were based on Tourrand (2000). Animal ME 
and CP requirements were calculated on the basis of needs for body 
maintenance, growth and production (e.g. meat production) and were 
derived from ˇSebek and Gosselink (2006). Meat products were assumed 
to be sold. 
2.4.2. Labour management 
Most interviewed farmers expressed the desire and ambition to free 
up time to participate in family and community events. Therefore, the 
maximization  of  household  leisure  time  (Ditzler  et  al.,  2019)  was 
included  as  objective.  At  the  farm  level,  labour  requirements  were 
calculated as the sum of crop labour, animal labour, and farm mainte-
nance labour. Labour should be provided by the household or hired 
labour. FarmDESIGN distinguished regular and casual labour (Groot 
et al., 2012). Regular labour referred to skilled family members working 
on-farm all year around and hired skilled labour, who could be either 
temporarily or permanently employed in the farm. Regular labour was 
needed  for  weeding,  fertilizers,  and  pesticides  applications,  sowing, 
irrigation, and other soil preparation work. Regular labour was also 
required for animal husbandry (e.g. feeding, medical care), herd man-
agement (e.g. keeping), and  farm maintenance (Groot et  al., 2012). 
Casual labour was provided by family members occasionally helping in 
the  fields  (e.g.  women,  children)  and  by  temporally  hired  unskilled 
workers. Casual labour was needed during labour peaks, such as vege-
table transplanting and harvests. Grass collection for the livestock also 
required casual labour. Regular labour had a higher cost than casual 
labour. Contract work was not accounted in any labour but quantified as 
a financial cost (Groot et al., 2012). 
2.4.3. Farm economics 
Economic performance was expressed through farm operating profit. 
Profit maximization tended to enhance smallholders' household eco-
nomic prosperity. It was calculated as the difference between the gross 
margins of crops and animals and the costs of manures, crop protection 
products, farm equipment, and hired regular and casual labour (Groot 
et al., 2012). Crop gross margin was affected by crop products fresh 
yields, price, cultivated area, cultivation costs, and contract work costs. 
Cultivation costs were the sum of seed costs, irrigation costs, and other 
costs (e.g. union fees, assurance, etc.). Bank fees and interests were 
included for farmers with access to credit. For rice, contract work costs 
were the sum of soil preparation, harvest and post-harvest operations, 
and transportation costs. For vegetables, only soil preparation costs were 
accounted in contract work costs (and transportation costs for onion). 
Harvest costs were included in labour costs and transportation was free 
for tomato and okra. Fertilizers and pesticides were subsidised up to 
50% of their price. Farm equipment referred to all equipment owned by 
farmers (e.g. motor pump, scooter, cart, hand spray). 
2.4.4. Nitrogen balance 
Environmental performance was expressed through the farm nitro-
gen (N) balance (kg ha(cid:0) 1), which reflects nitrogen losses in the envi-
ronment based on farm-level inputs and outputs. N inputs comprised 
crop and animal product imports for the household, fertilizer imports, 

and.  

(1) maximize area of rice,  
(2) maximize farm operating profit,  
(3) maximize farmer leisure time by reducing the labour burden, 
(4) minimize N balance to avoid nutrient losses. 
Maximizing rice area could contribute to meeting the goals of the 
Senegalese government towards national rice self-sufficiency, and of 
smallholder  farmers  towards  household  rice  self-sufficiency  (MAER, 
2014). In the optimization, the performance for the various objectives is 
adjusted  through  generating  alternative  farm  configurations  that 
involve reconfiguration of production activities pertaining to crop and 
livestock husbandry typical for the selected farm systems (see Tables S3 
and S4 in Supplementary Material). 
2.4.1. Production activities: cropping systems and livestock 
Annual cropping patterns describing the use of fields involved either 
single cropping (one crop per field) or successions of two crops with at 
least one rice cultivation per year. To create a succession a rice crop 
grown in hot dry season (HDS) would be combined with rice or vege-
table crops in either the CDS or WS seasons. Five single crops and four 
successions were considered in this study (Table 1). If a crop was not 
grown by a farmer, estimated values for requirements, costs and pro-
ductivity were calculated based on information collected from other 
farmers. 
To parameterise the model, yields of rice, tomato, okra and onion 
were asked from interviews and converted to productivity expressed in 
kg per hectare. With farmers renting assigned land in irrigation schemes 
developed by the government, farmers knew their exact crop area from 
official  documents.  They  also  knew  most  of  their  production  quite 
accurately because all tomatoes were sold, and for rice local millers were 
paid on a product basis. Paddy rice was either sold or self-consumed. 

Table 1 
Cropping patterns observed on farms and used in the multi-objective modelling 
of rice-based farming systems in the Senegal River Valley. WS: wet season, HDS: 
hot dry season, CDS: cool dry season.   

Single 
crops 

Successions 

1st crop 

Rice WS 
Rice 
HDS 
Onion 
CDS 
Tomato 
CDS 
Okra WS 
Rice 
HDS 
Rice 
HDS 
Rice 
HDS 
Rice 
HDS 

Initial 
month 
Jul/ 
Aug 
Feb/ 
Mar 
Oct/ 
Nov 
Oct/ 
Nov 
Jun- 
Aug 
Feb/ 
Mar 
Feb/ 
Mar 
Feb/ 
Mar 
Feb/ 
Mar 

Final 
month 
Nov/ 
Dec  
Jun/ 
Jul 
Mar/ 
Apr 
Mar/ 
Apr 
Oct/ 
Nov 
Jun/ 
Jul 
Jun/ 
Jul 
Jun/ 
Jul 
Jun/ 
Jul 

2nd crop 

Initial 
month 

Final 
month 

Rice WS 
Onion 
CDS 
Tomato 
CDS 
Okra WS 

Jul/ 
Aug 
Oct/ 
Nov 
Oct/ 
Nov 
Jun- 
Aug 

Nov/ 
Dec 
Mar/ 
Apr 
Mar/ 
Apr 
Oct/ 
Nov  

AgriculturalSystems193(2021)1032114Political 

Economic 

Access to irrigation 
systems 
Pressure towards 
rice self-sufficiency 
Lack of 
engagement from 
the government 
Tomatoes sold 
through pre- 
harvest sale 
contracts 
High-profit 
livestock 
production 
Onions sold on 
local markets 

Low-profit rice 
production 
Subsidies for rice 
cultivation 
Access to bank 
credit through 
Farmers' Unions 
Farmers' low 
financial capacity/ 
No individual 
credit 
High interest rates 

Intensify rice 
cultivation in HDS 
Promote rice double 
cropping 
Slow intensification 
progress 
Increase household 
income/ Intensify 
tomato cultivation 
Financial conflict of 
interest with crop 
production 
Direct income/ 
Uncertainty of price 
and sale/Limit onion 
cultivation 
Low income/ Increase 
interest for vegetable 
cultivation 
Intensify rice 
cultivation 
Intensify rice 
cultivation 
High risk on 
investment/ Reliance 
on Farmers' Unions/ 
Limit vegetable 
cultivation 
No insurance of 
household food 
security/Search for 
alternative income 
sources 
Use of certified seeds/ 
Intensify rice 
cultivation 
Yield penalties 

A. Brosseau et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
symbiotic  and  non-symbiotic  fixation,  and  deposition.  N  outputs 
comprised crop and animal product exports and manure exports. A ni-
trogen balance larger than zero implied a surplus supply of nitrogen that 
could be lost in the environment. 
3. Results 
3.1. Rapid system analysis 
3.1.1. Main drivers influencing farmers' decisions 
Farmers reported various drivers influencing their options and de-
cisions on agricultural activities (Table 2). Farmers perceived that rice 
intensification  was  driven  by  political  and  financial  incentives  (e.g. 
credits and subsidies), and supported by agronomic research and assis-
tance (e.g. with the SAED: Soci´et´e d'Am´enagement et d'Exploitation des 
terres du Delta et des vall´ees du fleuve S´en´egal et de la Fal´em´e), but 
could be hampered by low involvement of the government (i.e. lack of 
investments).  Compared  to  rice,  certainty  about  product  prices  and 
accessible  funding  mechanisms  were  seen  as  crucial  drivers  for 
increasing vegetable cultivation. However, the integration of vegetable 
production in the farm was largely limited by the decisions made at 
Farmers Union level (e.g. farm machinery management, credit distri-
bution) and the defective organisation of the supply chain. The farmers 
stated that the low production levels of crops and post-harvest losses 
originated primarily from lack of well-functioning machinery, storage 
facilities (especially for vegetables), poor infrastructure and insufficient 
tillage  and  field  preparation  techniques.  Farmers  also  explained  the 
ongoing shift of rice cultivation from WS to HDS due to biophysical and 
environmental constraints (see Section 3.1.2). 
3.1.2. Farm functioning and farmers' perspectives 
Interviewed  farmers  reported  earning  a  low  income  that  hardly 
covered the household expenses throughout the year. They also relied on 
bank credits to purchase inputs for rice and tomato production (e.g. 
seeds, fertilizers, pesticides, irrigation costs), and soil preparation costs 
(only for tillage, while ploughing and levelling were self-financed). 
Farmers also mentioned that rice was mainly grown for household 
self-consumption but still a significant part of the production had to be 
sold to reimburse cultivation costs and cover household expenses. In 
other words, rice production levels defined whether farmers could pay 
their credits while ensuring household food security. Farmers preferred 
to use short duration rice varieties such as Sahel 108 to mitigate bio-
physical risks that could jeopardize successful crop harvest (e.g. early 
rains at the end of the HDS, early cold at the end of the WS), and/or to 
alleviate  the negative  impact  of  delayed sowing. Most  farmers  used 
certified  seeds  due  to  their  overall  quality.  Farmers  reported  tran-
sitioning from growing rice in WS to HDS because of the restoration of 
irrigation systems by the mid 1990's, higher yields, and avoiding WS 
limitations including cold weather, difficult field access because of the 
rain, and pest and bird pressure on rice production. 
Vegetables were a popular alternative to the low-profit rice pro-
duction. Vegetable production enabled farmers to increase their total 
income  and  to  spread  that  income  throughout  the  year,  ensuring 
household food security. Main vegetables included onion (Allium cepa) 
and tomato (Solanum lycopersicum), but also okra (Abelmoschus escu-
lentus), watermelon (Citrullus lanatus), and aubergine (Solanum melon-
gena). Most farmers used certified seeds. Tomatoes were generally sold 
through sale contracts. Onions were sold on local markets, providing a 
direct  income  to  farmers  but  lowering  onion prices  at  harvest  peak 
(David-Benz and Seck, 2018). In response, some farmers harvested on-
ions prematurely to be first on the market, while others waited for the 
price to increase (David-Benz and Seck, 2018). Long-term storage onion 
varieties were preferred to avoid post-harvest losses. 
Farmers listed several considerations for a viable vegetable cultiva-
tion in the region. Salinity in the Delta could prohibit vegetable growth, 
but if salinity was absent, lighter soils could be an advantage for onion 

Agronomic 
research for rice 
cultivation 
Lack/ Poor 
condition of 
machinery 
Poor condition of 
infrastructures 
Lack of storage 
facilities 
Reliance on 
Farmers' Unions 
Defective 
organisation of the 
supply chain 
Higher rice yields 
in HDS 
WS limitations for 
rice cultivation 
Biophysical risks 
and delays 
Light soil 
preparation/ Rare 
levelling/ 
ploughing 

Yield penalties/ Post- 
harvest losses/ Limit 
vegetable cultivation 
Post-harvest losses/ 
Limit vegetable 
cultivation 
Limited window for 
decision-making and 
planning 
Limited window to 
integrate (more) 
vegetables 
Shift of rice cultivation 
period from WS to HDS 

Use of short duration 
rice varieties 
Yield penalties 

Organisational 

Production 
variability 

Financial 

Technical 

production compared to the heavy clay soils near Fanaye. Vegetable 
cultivation  was  also  constrained  by  farmers'  low  financial  capacity, 
which  explained  the  relatively  small  cultivated  areas.  Proximity  to 
buyers (e.g. agro-industries, merchants) was necessary to ensure the sale 

Table 2 
Main drivers influencing farmers' options and agricultural activities in the Delta 
and Middle Valley of the Senegal River Valley. Data: 20 interviews of the rapid 
system analysis.  
Category 

Driver 

Consequence/ effect on 
cropping systems 

% farmers 
mentioning 
the driver 
100% 
100% 
30% 

90% 

80% 

75% 

35% 

100% 
90% 

75% 

50% 

100% 

80% 

50% 

50% 

60% 

30% 

85% 
80% 
70% 
25%  

AgriculturalSystems193(2021)1032115A. Brosseau et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
of the harvest while reducing post-harvest losses. Finally, market price 
fluctuations regulated selling prices and thus crop profitability. Despite 
farmers' willingness to diversify crop production, growing new crops is 
risky and self-financed. Farmers mentioned they lacked the necessary 
technical,  financial,  and  organisational  support  to  integrate  (more) 
vegetables in their cropping systems. 
Livestock husbandry represented a central but resource-demanding 
component for these farmers. Animal production was a growing busi-
ness but often not considered a major farming activity. Sheep were 
valuable cultural assets, notably due to the religious context; Islam is the 
predominant religion in the study area. Goats were sometimes preferred 
over sheep due to their autonomy but were less valuable. Donkeys and 
horses  provided  draught  power  and  transport.  Small  ruminants  and 
equines were generally raised on-farm, fed with rice residues (e.g. bran 
and husks) supplemented with concentrates and other vegetation. Cattle 
were kept and fed outside the village by paid ranchers, and mainly used 
as  financial backup. Farmers employed field keepers  to avoid cattle 
entering in their fields by the end of the HDS where feed and water were 
scarce (De Mey et al., 2012). Animal manure was rarely collected, oc-
casionally applied on vegetable nurseries. 
Off-farm and social activities (e.g. family, community and religious 
events) were also influencing farmers' decisions on labour allocation. 
Some  farmers  had  other  significant  sources  of  income,  occupying  a 
function such as farmers' representative, SAED agent, or water pump 
station agent. 

limitations listed above, his agricultural limitations also included high 
credit interest rate and costs of extra labour. 
The specialized-rice farmer owned 1 ha of land to grow rice for the 
whole year, and he also rented 2 ha in HDS. Out of the seven household 
members, he was the only working full time on the farm, although his 
wife also helped for the harvest, threshing and sales, besides raising the 
children. He also hired a worker almost full time. His main source of 
income was rice production. Each season, he reimbursed his credit, kept 
enough rice to feed his household until the next harvest, and sold the 
remaining part. They raised three sheep for household consumption and 
kept two zebus. He also guarded the village water pump station during 
the weekend for extra income. His limitations also included lack of 
infrastructure to access field and lack of proper rice storage facilities. 
The  mixed-tomato  farmer  was  proudly  a  self-financed  producer 
located in the middle valley. His household comprised 25 members. He 
was the only family member working full time on-farm, but his three 
brothers also supported him and he also hired external labour. He owned 
4.35 ha and each field hosted a specific crop avoiding cropping calendar 
overlaps. When fields were not used for cropping, they were left in 
fallow. He grew rice on 2.3 ha in HDS and occasionally used a part of this 
area to grow rice in WS. In addition, he rented 1 ha extra in HDS to grow 
rice.  In  CDS,  tomato  and  onion  were  grown  on  0.5  and  0.75  ha, 
respectively. Finally, okra was grown on 0.8 ha in WS. His main source 
of income was tomato production. His household was self-sufficient in 
rice. They managed around 15 sheep for household consumption and for 
sales, and 20 zebus as savings. He also owned a thresher which he rented 
out to nearby farmers in exchange of 10% of their harvest. His limita-
tions  also  included  soil  fertility  decline,  poor  maintenance  of  water 
channels, and low selling price for rice. He also wished to extend his 
cropped area. 
The mixed-rice farmer was also located in the middle valley. His 
household comprised 18 members, but only he and his younger brother 
were working full-time on the farm. The four women also participated in 
the vegetable harvest and were mostly busy with children. He also hired 
external labour during the harvesting season. He owned 1.3 ha and 
rented 1.15 ha. Rice was grown on 1.85 ha in HDS, tomato and onion 
were respectively grown on 0.35 and 0.14 ha in CDS, and okra was 
grown on 0.11 ha in WS. That particular season he did not grow rice, 
leaving these fields in fallow. Still, his main source of income was rice 
production. After credit reimbursement, most of the rice production was 
sold to provide an income. As a result, the household could be fed with 
his own production only up to six months after the harvest. Three sheep 
and poultry were raised for household consumption and/or extra in-
come, and 4 zebus were kept as savings. His limitations also included 
difficulty to sell rice and tomato products for a good price. 

3.3. Underlying processes of farmers choices 

The FarmDESIGN quantitative analysis on the current performance 
of the four selected farms was divided into two levels: a farming and a 

3.2. Detailed system analysis 
3.2.1. Farm descriptions 
The four selected farmers presented striking similarities in terms of 
agricultural limitations and objectives. Main limitations included: lack 
of machinery (for land preparation and/or harvests) causing delays in 
sowing and yield losses; limited access to cropland; and high pest and 
disease pressure (especially birds reducing rice yields). Main objectives 
comprised: increase of agricultural income, growing interest towards 
cropping  system  diversification  with  more  vegetables  and  livestock 
production; and decrease of farm workload to find or keep off-farm jobs 
and participate in family and community events. 
However, the four selected farmers combined different cropping and 
livestock activities, but they focused on a particular crop. They also 
differed in terms of farming structure and objectives (Table 3). We refer 
to the four farmers interviewed as: “Mixed-onion farmer”, “Specialised 
rice farmer”, “Mixed-tomato farmer” and “Mixed-rice farmer”. 
The mixed-onion farmer was a young farmer in the Delta region who 
recently  inherited  a  0.5  ha  farm.  The  household  comprised  three 
members with only one working on-farm, although his neighbours often 
helped him. His main source of income was onion production with a two 
years rotation (rice HDS – rice WS – rice HDS – onion/tomato CDS). They 
were not self-sufficient and had to buy extra rice. He proudly owned 2 to 
4 sheep for self-consumption and extra income. In addition to the main 

Table 3 
Household characteristics of the four case study farms from the Senegal River Valley.  
Farmer 

Household size 

Location 

Mixed-onion 
Specialized- 
rice 
Mixed- 
tomato 
Mixed-rice 

Pont du 
Gendarme 
Boundoum 
Barrage 
Ndierba 
Fanaye Di´eri 

Adult 
2 
2 
20 
8 

Child 
1 
5 
5 
10 

a Values between brackets represent household casual labour. 

Age of 
household 
head 
(year) 
26 
45 
42 
39 

Education level 
household head 

University 
Primary 
University 
Primary 

Family members 
working on the 
farm 
# 
1 
1 (+1)a 
4 
2 (+4)a 

Household 
workforce 

Main source 
of income 

Main type of 
financing 

Rice self- 
sufficiency 

(h year(cid:0) 1) 
2190 
2080 (+470)a 
4137 
4380 
(+1220)a 

Onion 
Rice 
Tomato 
Rice 

Credit 
Credit 
Self-financed 
Credit 

(months) 
1 to 4 
8 to 10 
10 to 12 
4 to 6  

AgriculturalSystems193(2021)1032116A. Brosseau et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
cropping system analysis. 
3.3.1. Farming system analysis 
The four selected farming systems showed large differences of yields, 
labour  requirements,  cultivation  costs,  and  fertilizer  use  (Table  4). 
Higher observed onion yields in the Delta could be explained by the 
lighter soils compared with the middle valley, and better crop man-
agement and/or timing of harvest. In addition, the mixed-onion farmer 
applied large quantities of urea to maximize yields and harvested the 
bulbs prematurely to benefit from higher market prices. In this way, he 
avoided overlaps in the cropping calendar between the cultivation of 
vegetables in CDS and rice in HDS. Variations in labour requirements 
could be explained by differences in terms of bird control strategy and 
manual weeding intensity. Rice cultivation costs were higher for the 
mixed-onion and specialized-rice farmers than for the other farmers due 
to differences in crop management strategy including soil preparation, 
type of harvest and threshing. All farmers used the amounts of fertilizers 
recommended by the SAED on rice (see Table S5 in Supplementary 
Material), except for the specialized-rice farmer who applied 50 kg ha(cid:0) 1 
of urea extra. However, rice was the crop with the least economic profit 
per unit of area. 
Rice in HDS produced higher yield than rice in WS resulting in higher 
margin per hectare. This could explain the ongoing shift of rice culti-
vation from WS towards the HDS. Manual harvest and threshing were 
more  common  than  mechanical  harvest  (with  combine  harvester). 
Manual harvest costed 75,000 to 90,000 FCFA/ha in HDS against 50,000 
FCFA/ha in WS. While threshing costed 10% of the total amount of rice 
produced, mechanical harvest (including threshing) costed 18%. Bird 
control  by  members  of  the  farmers'  household  was  the  most  time- 
consuming activity related to rice cultivation. 

Onion and tomato were the most profitable crops. Although tomato 
seemed to be slightly more profitable than onion with low cultivation 
costs, it was time-consuming due to (daily) crop monitoring, manual 
weeding,  multiple  fertilizers  and  pesticides  applications,  and  labour 
peaks at transplanting and harvest. Onion could outperform tomato if 
grown in appropriate conditions. Onion had the highest cultivation costs 
due to its costly seeds. Onion was also time-consuming with some labour 
peaks at transplanting and harvest. Large quantities of fertilizer were 
applied on both vegetables. Okra yields (and profitability) were very 
variable according to crop management strategy. Okra had low culti-
vation costs, but it was very time-consuming due to the demanding 
harvests.  Nevertheless,  farmers'  estimation  of  okra  production  data 
tended to be less accurate than other crops because multiple harvests 
were required during the growing season, it was self-financed, and it was 
sold on informal markets. 
3.3.2. Cropping systems analysis 
The contribution of the individual cropping systems to the selected 
four  objectives  (area  under  rice  production,  farm  operating  profit, 
farmer leisure time and N balance) are presented in Fig. 2. For example, 
less N fertilizer was applied on rice than vegetables, and fertilizers with 
low N content were usually applied on tomato. For onion, N balance 
differed  among  farmers  depending  on  their  financial  capacity  and 
experience with the crop. Large amounts of N fertilizer were applied on 
okra, resulting in a high N balance. 
Single crops were less time consuming than successions (Figs. 2a & 
2b).  Depending  on  farmers'  management practices,  tomato  or  onion 
were the two most labour-consuming crops. Rice as single crop poten-
tially allowed for more leisure time than the other cropping patterns. 
Since labour costs were not accounted in credits, it made sense for a 

Table 4 
Farm characteristics of the four case study farms. Data based on interviews conducted in December 2017.  
Farmer 

Crops 
Type 

Season 

Area 

Yield 

Mixed-onion 

Specialized- 

rice 

Mixed-tomato 

Mixed-rice 

Aug/Sep - Nov/ 
Dec 
Mar/Apr - Jul/ 
Aug 
Oct - Feb/Mar 
Oct – Mar 

Jul/Aug - Nov/ 
Dec 
Feb/Mar - Jun/ 
Jul 

Aug – Nov/Dec 
Mar – Jul 
Oct - Mar/Apr 
Oct – Mar 
Jun - Aug/Sep 

Mar – Jul 
Oct - Mar/Apr 
Oct – Mar 
Jun - Aug/Sep 

Rice WS 
Rice HDS 
Onion CDS 
Tomato CDS 
Cultivated 
area  
Rice WS 
Rice HDS 

Cultivated 
area  
Rice WS 
Rice HDS 
Onion CDS 
Tomato CDS 
Okra WS 
Cultivated 
area  
Rice HDS 
Onion CDS 
Tomato CDS 
Okra WS 
Cultivated 
area  

(ha) 

0.5 
0.5 
0.3 
0.2 
0.5          
1.0 
3.0 

(t FM 
ha(cid:0) 1) 
5.6 
8.0 
32.3 
37.5 

6.8 
8.0 

3.0        
1.0 
6.4 
3.3 
7.3 
0.75 
14.7 
0.5 
30.9 
0.8 
2.3 
5.35          
6.3 
1.85 
0.14 
16.7 
0.35 
38.7 
0.11 
7.2 
2.45        

Cultivation 
costs 
(K FCFA ha(cid:0) 1) 

404 
472 
545 
238 

474 
522 

313 
304 
505 
230 
211 

336 
540 
251 
191 

Margin 

Labour 

(K FCFA 
ha(cid:0) 1) 
348 
642 
3487 
1712 

473 
593 

578 
714 
1335 
1403 
351 

570 
1549 
1762 
1419 

(h 
ha(cid:0) 1) 
684 
756 
1416 
883 

580 
580 

672 
468 
923 
1293 
829 

450 
1229 
1409 
3806 

Fertilizers 
Urea 
(kg 
ha(cid:0) 1) 
300 
300 
833 
250 

DAP 
(kg 
ha(cid:0) 1) 
100 
100 
333 
– 

9–23-30 
(kg 
ha(cid:0) 1) 
– 

– 

–   
850   

350 
350 

300 
300 
200 
200 
750 

292 
536 
214 
1636 

100 
100 

100 
100 
– 
250 
250 

95 
714 
171 
455 

– 

– 

– 
– 
667 
650 
– 

– 
– 
571 
– 

Animals 
Type 

Donkey 
Sheep 

Donkey 
Sheep 
Zebu 
Poultry 
Donkey 
Horse 
Lamb 
Sheep 
Zebu 

Horse 
Lamb 
Sheep 
Zebu 
Poultry 
Goat 

No 

# 

1 
3 

1 
3           
2 
3 
2 
1 
5 
10 
15 

1 
5 
3 
4           
41 
16 

Yields are expressed in Fresh Matter (FM). At the time of data-analysis, 16 May 2018, FCFA 1000 = EUR 1.52 = USD = 1.79. (FCFA: Franc Communaut´e financi`ere 
d'Afrique (‘Financial Community of Africa Franc’)). 

AgriculturalSystems193(2021)1032117A. Brosseau et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Fig. 2. Analysis of N balance, crop margin, and household leisure time at cropping-system level for the four case study farms: FarmDESIGN outputs before multi- 
objective optimization. For each cropping system, household leisure time was calculated as the difference between total household available time minus the labour 
required to grow one hectare of the related crop(s). Negative leisure time occurred for time-intensive crops which required to hire extra labour. Each colour rep-
resents a farm, and each marker represents a single crop or a crop succession. 

farmer to prioritize the less time-consuming crops and to favour their 
own labour. Crop successions were always more profitable than single 
crops. The rice-rice cropping system was still less profitable than a single 
onion or tomato. Overall, crops ensuring high margins tended to be the 
most time-consuming (e.g. onion, tomato), and showed the highest N 
balance (e.g. onion, okra). Crops showing low N balances tended to be 

the less profitable and less labour intensive (e.g. rice). 
3.4. Multi-objective optimization 

The  FarmDESIGN  quantitative  exploration  was  divided  into  an 
assessment of trade-offs and an analysis of potential alternative farm 

Fig. 3. Trade-off between the four objectives (rice area, profit, leisure time and N balance) for four farmers (“Mixed-onion farmer”, “Specialized-rice farmer”, 
“Mixed-tomato farmer”, and “Mixed-rice farmer”. Point clouds show Pareto frontiers after multi-objective optimization. Each colour represents a farm. Each dot 
represents a new farming system configuration. The large symbols represent the current performance for the four farming systems. 

AgriculturalSystems193(2021)10321183.4.3. Similarities and differences between farmers 
For each of the 4 farmers and for each of the 4 objectives, key fea-
tures of the farming system (allocation of land and labour, farm ex-
penses)  would  change compared  with the  current  situation, but the 
explorations showed curious similarities and differences (Table 5). 
The exploration of alternative farm configurations produced some 
similar results among the selected farmers in terms of crop profitability, 
nutrient  losses,  and  rice  area.  First,  rice-vegetable  and/or  vegetable 
(with onion as main source of income) generated higher profit than rice 
either single or double cropping. By prioritizing these crops, both total 
farm labour and expenses would increase due to the additional house-
hold on-farm labour (except for the mixed-onion farmer), hired labour 
and its associated costs (except for the mixed-rice farmer), and culti-
vation costs. Second, rice in HDS caused the least N losses and household 
workload. By specializing in this crop, total farm labour would decrease 
due to the decrease of household farm labour. Although cultivation costs 
would  decrease,  total  farm  expenses  could  increase  or  decrease 
depending  on  the  additional  hired  labour  and  its  associated  costs. 
Finally, rice in HDS and/or rice-vegetables maximized rice area. By 
prioritizing these crops, total farm labour would increase (except for the 
mixed-onion  and  specialized-rice  farmers),  and  total  farm  expenses 
would rise (except for the mixed-onion) due to the additional cultivation 
costs and/or hired labour and its associated costs. 
These explorations also showed major differences among farmers in 
terms of household on-farm labour, hired labour and total expenses. 
First, when maximizing profit, household on-farm labour requirements 
increased for most farmers but decreased for the mixed-onion farmer. 
This farmer could replace household labour by external labour because 
the additional hired labour costs were outperformed by onion cultiva-
tion. Second, when maximizing profit, hired labour increased for most 
farmers but decreased for the mixed-rice farmer, who could replace 
external labour by household labour. Third, when minimizing house-
hold  on-farm  labour  and  N  losses,  total  expenses  decreased  for  the 
mixed-tomato  and  mixed-onion  farmers  but 
increased  for  the 
specialized-rice and mixed-rice farmers. For the latter two farmers, the 
reductions of crop cultivation costs were outperformed by the increase 
of labour costs. Fourth, when maximizing rice area, total farm labour 
increased for the mixed-tomato and mixed-rice farmers but stayed stable 
for the mixed-onion and specialized-rice farmers, who already priori-
tized rice area in their current cropping system. Finally, when maxi-
mizing rice area, total farm expenses increased for most farmers, but 
decreased for the mixed-onion farmer, who could deal with the work-
load without additional hired labour. 
4. Discussion 
4.1. Drivers of farmers' decisions 

A. Brosseau et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
configurations. 
3.4.1. Trade-offs among farm performance indicators 
Fig. 3 shows the opportunity spaces for farm adjustments relative to 
the initial situation for each of the farms. These results from the multi- 
objective  optimization,  wherein  farm  management  variables  are 
adjusted and the associated changes in farm performance indicators 
assessed and optimized. Multiple potential trade-offs between the four 
selected objectives were observed (Fig. 3). For all farmers, household 
leisure time would decrease when farm profit increased (Fig. 3a). The 
mixed-tomato farmer had the largest farm area and could potentially 
reach  the  highest  farm  operating  profit.  The  specialized-rice  farmer 
could increase his operating profit by shifting rice production to vege-
table and rice-vegetable production. The larger the farm, the higher the 
potential room for increasing farm profit (Fig. 3b). But the higher the 
profit, the higher the N balance (Fig. 3c). This high N balance was 
particularly marked for the mixed-onion farmer, who had already used 
relatively high levels of fertilizers in his small vegetable production. On 
the other hand, there was no clear relation between area under rice 
production and household leisure time (Fig. 3d). 
Similarly, for the Pareto-optimal solutions, the N balance tended to 
decrease while household leisure time increased for all farmers (Fig. 3e). 
The relation between N balance and area under rice was mixed (Fig. 3f). 
For the specialized-rice farmer, a larger area under rice meant lower N 
balance because the single rice or rice-rice production had low N losses. 
For the mixed-rice and the mixed-tomato farmer, a larger area under rice 
could decrease N balance through the integration of a single rice instead 
of a single vegetable, or could increase N balance through the adoption 
of rice-vegetable successions. 
Compared to the initial farm configurations (large symbols, Fig. 3), 
the optimization results for the mixed-onion farmer showed that the 
options for improvements in the various indicators were quite limited. 
This reflected that he was already combining his crops and rotations in a 
very  efficient  small  farm  leaving  little  room  for  improvement.  The 
optimization results for the other farms showed that performances could 
be enhanced. In the next section, we describe the changes needed to 
achieve these potential better performances in detail. 
3.4.2. Exploration of alternative farm configurations 
Maximizing or minimizing the 4 objectives lead to different farm 
configurations for each of the 4 farmers. 
For the mixed-onion farmer, the ideal cropping system included: 
rice-tomato, rice-onion, rice-rice, and rice in HDS (see Fig. S1 in the 
Supplementary Material). Rice-onion generated more profit than any 
other crop, but also higher N losses. Rice-tomato could be favoured over 
rice-onion to lower N balance while providing relatively high margins. 
The expansion of rice in HDS and rice-rice would increase leisure time 
and reduce N losses but decrease farm profit. 
For both the specialized-rice farmer and the mixed-tomato farmer, 
the ideal cropping system was: onion, rice-onion, and rice in HDS (see 
Figs. S2 and S3). Rice in HDS generated the most leisure time and the 
least N losses but also the least farm profit. The expansion of onion and 
rice-onion would provide the highest profit, but also the highest N los-
ses, and the least leisure time. 
For the mixed-tomato farmer, the single onion could be grown too to 
allow lower N balance than rice-onion while providing high returns. 
Rice-tomato had higher margins, but the extra labour needed when 
compared with rice-onion was proportionally greater than the corre-
sponding extra returns. 
For the mixed-rice farmer, the optimal cropping system was: rice in 
HDS, tomato, and rice-onion (see Fig. S4). Rice in HDS generated the 
most leisure time and the least N losses but also the least farm profit, 
whereas rice-onion generated the highest profit, but also the highest N 
losses, and the least leisure time. Tomato could be favoured over rice- 
onion to lower N balance while providing high returns. 

Farmers' perceptions on the major factors influencing agricultural 
decisions reflect their political and institutional context. Support for rice 
expansion and intensification relates to the ongoing effort of the Sene-
galese  government  to  achieve  national  rice  self-sufficiency  (MAER, 
2014) by investing in agricultural finance and agronomic research for 
rice, implementation of credits and subsidies for fertilizers, pesticides, 
and machinery (Demont and Rizzotto, 2012; MAER, 2014). 
These efforts led to an accelerated expansion of the area under rice 
cultivation (Busetto et al., 2019; Saito et al., 2015b). These national 
efforts  shaped  farmers'  options  and  agricultural  practices  through 
complex  institutional arrangements.  Farmers  were often  gathered in 
farmers groups and unions (Bonnefond, 1982). Union representatives, 
who often collaborated with the government, took key decisions (Bon-
nefond, 1982) including: buying farm machinery and arranged their 
usage schedule among farmers (Gay and Dancette, 1995; MAER, 2014), 
and being intermediaries between farmers and banks to obtain credits to 
purchase  essential  crop  inputs  (Gay  and  Dancette,  1995).  Hence, 
farmers' options in agricultural investment largely depended on these 

AgriculturalSystems193(2021)1032119A. Brosseau et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

Farm configuration 

Farm expenses 

Main income source 

Table 5 
Optimum farm configurations according to the favoured objective. Data based on farming system optimization using FarmDESIGN. Differences in total farm area, 
compared to the current configuration, result from the optimization.  
Land distribution 
Farmer 
Rice 
(ha) 
0.25 
0.05 
0.35 
0.34 
0.25 
3.00 
0.48 
2.87 
2.87 
3.00 
3.30 
1.03 
3.94 
4.07 
3.09 
1.85 
0.49 
1.97 
2.18 
1.83 

Current 
(Max) Farm operational profit 
(Min) Nitrogen balance 
(Max) Household leisure time 
(Max) Area of rice 
Current 
(Max) Farm operational profit 
(Min) Nitrogen balance 
(Max) Household leisure time 
(Max) Area of rice 
Current 
(Max) Farm operational profit 
(Min) Nitrogen balance 
(Max) Household leisure time 
(Max) Area of rice 
Current 
(Max) Farm operational profit 
(Min) Nitrogen balance 
(Max) Household leisure time 
(Max) Area of rice 

Rice-vegetable 
(ha) 
0.25 
0.45 
0.10 
0.11 
0.25 
– 
1.19 
0.01 
0.01 
– 
– 
3.47 
0.03 
0.04 
1.47 
– 
1.85 
0.01 
0.03 
0.61 

Labour distribution 
Household 
(h/year) 
848 
752 
352 
239 
842 
2246 
2387 
– 
– 
2098 
2683 
3121 
653 
– 
1365 
3771 
5544 
3174 
1311 
2147 

Hired 
(h/year) 
246 
485 
493 
594 
251 
1440 
3097 
3673 
3673 
1560 
2741 
4261 
3845 
4345 
4281 
234 
57 
384 
1886 
1881 

(M FCFA/year) 
674 
759 
643 
663 
672 
2888 
3928 
3239 
3239 
2939 
3749 
5504 
3574 
3998 
4782 
1420 
2330 
1482 
1977 
2408 

Vegetable 
(ha) 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
1.32 
0.01 
0.01 
– 
2.05 
0.81 
1.20 
0.83 
0.78 
0.60 
0.11 
0.39 
0.05 
0.01 

Onion 
Onion 
Rice 
Rice 
Onion 
Rice 
Onion 
Rice 
Rice 
Rice 
Tomato 
Onion 
Rice 
Rice 
Onion 
Rice 
Onion 
Rice 
Rice 
Rice  

Mixed-onion 

Specialized-rice 

Mixed-tomato 

Mixed-rice 

institutional and financial service arrangements. 
An important factor not explicitly addressed in the modelling study is 
risk management by farmers. Farmers acknowledged that crop cultiva-
tion under irrigation and the integration of (more) vegetables in rice- 
based  cropping systems could be affected  by risks related to labour 
availability and affordability, technical know-how for new crops, mar-
keting opportunities, and financial risks when credits would be granted. 
Some of these uncertainties can be captured in risk indicators based on 
yield and price variability used in farm modelling (e.g., Mandryk et al., 
2014; Kozicka et al., 2020); this would require multi-year datasets that 
were  not  available for  our  case  study. Risks  related  to  off-farm un-
certainties could be addressed by multi-objective optimization under 
uncertainty (Choi et al., 2008; Crespo et al., 2010), but difficulties in 
estimation of the degree of uncertainty that farmers face due to different 
drivers would complicate interpretation. 
4.2. Farming systems description 

The results of the quick system analysis captured major agricultural 
drivers and trends of smallholder rice production in Senegal. Specif-
ically, these results showed that a more efficient rice cultivation, and 
especially rice double cropping, highly depended on the Unions' ca-
pacity to timely provide machinery to the farmers. Since farmers mostly 
relied on the few available machines of the Unions, some farmers could 
benefit from the availability of Union machinery while others suffered 
yield  penalties  caused  by  delayed  planting.  This  aligns  with  similar 
studies, where farmers also mentioned machinery unavailability as one 
of the main causes of delayed sowing (Diagne et al., 2013; Tanaka et al., 
2015). In fact, agricultural machinery covered less than 50% of farmers' 
needs in the SRV because a considerable number of agricultural ma-
chines were broken down or unsuitable to the local biophysical condi-
tions (MAER, 2014). These results support the claim that rice production 
intensification in the SRV still requires more adequate mechanization 
(Diagne et al., 2013; MAER, 2014). 
The quick system analysis confirmed farmers' preferences and ben-
efits of growing rice in HDS. Previous studies also observed a similar 
shift of rice cultivation from the WS to the HDS season because of more 
favourable weather conditions leading to higher yields (Busetto et al., 
2019;  Djaman  et  al.,  2017;  Saito  et  al.,  2015b),  and  lower  disease 
pressure (Djaman et al., 2017; Tanaka et al., 2015). 
Finally, this study also documented why and how the interviewed 

farmers were diversifying crop production by growing more profitable 
options such as vegetables and investing on livestock production. This 
supports previous findings showing how despite various constraints, 
farmers  diversified  cropping  systems  enabling  them  to  increase  the 
production potential of lowland systems in the SRV (Bado et al., 2018; 
Gay and Dancette, 1995; Haefele et al., 2013), rising and diversifying 
their income, spreading risk, and ensuring food security (Bonnefond, 
1982; Gay and Dancette, 1995; PNUE, 2005). 
4.3. Farming system exploration 

Modelling outcomes suggested three focal points for policy based 
and technological interventions: improving soil management, intensi-
fying  and  diversifying  sustainable  cropping  systems,  and  adjusting 
funding mechanisms. 
4.3.1. Better soil management and conservation 
The nutrient balance of the current farm management and configu-
ration showed high potential N and P soil losses, and soil K mining in the 
four studied farms. Significant surpluses on the N balance were ob-
tained, particularly for vegetables where farmers often bought more 
fertilizers than recommended hoping for high yields. For rice, inter-
viewed farmers applied the amount of N and P fertilizers (156 kg N ha(cid:0) 1, 
46 kg P ha(cid:0) 1) recommended by the SAED (2012), which exceeded the 
recommended doses (120 kg N ha(cid:0) 1, 26 kg P ha(cid:0) 1, 50 kg K ha(cid:0) 1) re-
ported in literature (Bado et al., 2010; Haefele et al., 2002b), resulting in 
N and P soil losses calculated in the model. This pattern has also been 
described by Haefele et al. (2013) who showed that fertilizer N losses in 
similar rice systems ranged from 50% to 82% of the applied amount. 
These  results  confirmed  that  instead  of  depleting  N  and  P,  current 
(intensive) irrigated rice and vegetable cultivation are generating large 
surpluses (Haefele et al., 2004). The potential K mining obtained in the 
nutrient balance can strongly reduce rice production, although Haefele 
et al. (2004) suggested that the high soil K reserves in the SRV region 
could buffer large negative K balances for decades. These results support 
the need for decision support tools at a site or production system level to 
increase  fertilizer  nutrient  efficiency  and  rice  productivity  while 
reducing potential negative environmental impacts (Saito et al., 2019; 
Tsujimoto et al., 2019). This could specifically include concepts of site- 
specific nutrient management, integrated crop management, system of 
rice intensification, or nutrient management decision-support for rice in 

AgriculturalSystems193(2021)10321110Rather than trying to force options that are not farmers' priority, it might 
be more effective to align policy-based or technological interventions 
with farmers' constraints and preferences. It is necessary that policy 
makers account for the ongoing trend of increasing vegetable cultivation 
and livestock production while seeking for other options to increase rice 
production that benefit both farmers' livelihoods and the national food 
security. For example, policies could aim at promoting rice varieties best 
adapted to the hot dry season and farming practices aiming at increasing 
rice yields in this particular season. 
The results also indicate a need for more policy support for vegetable 
cropping  (David-Benz  and  Seck,  2018;  Huat  and  David-Benz,  2000; 
MAER, 2014; van Oort et al., 2016). Several issues became clear that 
deserve more attention from policy making, including need for tools to 
improve  nutrient  and  water  management,  soil  conservation,  limit 
chemical  input  use  (i.e.  fertilizers  and  pesticides),  better  transport, 
infrastructure and post-harvest facilities, and dissemination of agricul-
tural information and market fluctuations (David-Benz and Seck, 2018; 
Krupnik et al., 2012b; Krupnik et al., 2012b). 
4.5. Methodological considerations 

A. Brosseau et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
the SRV (Bado et al., 2018; Haefele et al., 2013; Krupnik et al., 2012b; 
Krupnik et al., 2012a; Saito et al., 2015a). 
4.3.2. Beyond rice production 
Both farmers' interviews and the modelling results suggested that 
under the current conditions farmers would be unlikely to increase or 
even maintain the area of rice double cropping, which has been strongly 
promoted by the Senegalese government (MAER, 2014). Besides the 
mixed-onion farmer who was already growing rice twice a year in half of 
his small farm, none of our multi-objective optimization alternatives 
showed an increase of the area of rice double cropping. Alternative 
simulations were run maximizing specifically the area of rice double 
cropping, but the model prioritized the land allocation to grow vege-
tables which performed better in terms of household income and labour 
than rice-rice. This prioritization was related to the functioning of the 
model which used non-weighing Pareto-based methods to optimize the 
selected  objectives  (Groot  et  al.,  2012).  Since  rice  double  cropping 
performed lower in terms of farm profit and household labour (also N 
balance for the mixed-rice farmer), it was expected that its area would 
not largely increase. Additional explorations could be made to test if 
using another indicator (i.e. household rice self-sufficiency) would have 
a different outcome in terms of rice production. Nevertheless, these re-
sults also suggested that governmental programmes should also consider 
farmers' objectives and limitations to better align their goal to achieve 
national food security (Ajayi et al., 2007; Meijer et al., 2014). 
4.3.3. Support for sustainable vegetable production 
In  contrast  to  rice  cultivation,  both  farmers'  interviews  and  the 
modelling  results  showed  that  under  the  current  conditions  farmers 
would be likely to keep investing in vegetable production. However, 
there  was  hardly  any  technical  or  financial  support  for  sustainable 
vegetables  cultivation,  as  it  was  the  case  for  tomato, for  which  the 
interviewed farmers did not know recommendations on sowing den-
sities. Similarly, Huat and David-Benz (2000) described that tomato 
farming  practices  in the  SRV  were highly variable  compared to the 
recommended practices. For onion production, David-Benz and Seck 
(2018) confirmed this observation by describing a very low quality of 
local onions despite the increasing production levels. van Oort et al. 
(2016)  also  reported  this  asymmetry  of  support  between  rice  and 
vegetable production in the SRV, while other authors have also listed the 
main limitations of vegetable production: lack of technical, financial and 
institutional support, and poor dissemination of agronomic information 
(David-Benz and Seck, 2018; Gay and Dancette, 1995; MAER, 2014). All 
these results supported the call for strong agronomic research and sup-
port assistance for farmers in the vegetable sector (MAER, 2014). 
4.4. Aligning government and farmers objectives 

The present study clearly showed that there is some conflict between 
farmers' objectives and government policies towards national rice self- 
sufficiency. Vegetable crops were more profitable than rice, but also 
more labour demanding, having higher N losses to the environment, and 
self-financed. Moreover, vegetables grown in semi-dry irrigated envi-
ronments  suffer  little  from diseases  which  thrive  in  humid  environ-
ments,  so  the  SRV  seems  very  well  suited  for  vegetable  cropping 
(although issues of salinity do occur) (Barbi´ero et al., 2004; Mishra et al., 
2014; van  Oort, 2018; Whipps and Budge,  2000). Therefore,  profit- 
oriented  farmers  were  more  likely  to  extend  the  area  of  vegetables 
rather than rice, to hire labourers during labour peaks, and to discharge 
large quantities of nutrients in the surroundings. In contrast, farmers 
with low investment capacity may favour rice to ensure household food 
security. 
To  date,  most  of  the  government's  ambition  to  reach  rice  self- 
sufficiency  in  Senegal  has  been  achieved  through  expansion  of  the 
area under irrigated rice cultivation by providing new land and using 
existing land for two instead of one rice crop per year (MAER, 2014). 

In this study, some key assumptions had to be made in terms of 
farmer selection and modelling analyses. Firstly, relatively few farmers 
were selected to account for the potential variability in farming systems 
in the study area, but they were not representative of the entire farming 
population and therefore these results should not be extrapolated to the 
entire SRV. Secondly, assumptions on farm characteristics and farmers' 
decisions had to be made in the modelling calibration. For example, soil 
characteristics were not included in the exploration for optimal cropping 
systems, which could influence crop selection (e.g. no vegetables in soils 
with  high  salinity).  Additionally,  FarmDESIGN  did  not  simulate  dy-
namic response of crop yield to soil nutrient availability or other man-
agement operations (Groot et al., 2012). If necessary, this limitation 
could be overcome by linking FarmDESIGN with dynamic crop simu-
lation  models  such  as  APSIM  and  CropSyst,  or  technical  coefficient 
generators such as TechnoGIN (Keating et al., 2003; Ponsioen et al., 
2006; St¨ockle et al., 2003). Another modelling assumption was that 
double cropping had a very narrow time span between the two crops, 
overlapping  in  some  growing  periods.  In  contrast,  some  farmers 
preferred to either harvest vegetables prematurely or sow rice later on 
(David-Benz and Seck, 2018; van Oort et al., 2016), reducing vegetable 
quality or inducing large rice yield gaps (David-Benz and Seck, 2018; 
Tanaka et al., 2015). A cropping calendar construction (CCC) model 
could  be  used  to  investigate  new  cropping  options  before  running 
FarmDESIGN (Groot et al., 2012; van Oort et al., 2016). Finally, po-
tential  changes  in  livestock  husbandry  were  not  included  in  the 
modelling, despite the fact that sheep farming had become a profitable 
business, and that integrated crop-livestock can be a more sustainable 
farming system (Lemaire et al., 2019). Future studies could also include 
animal and fodder production to explore farming system options in the 
SRV. 
5. Conclusions 

The livelihoods of smallholder farmers in the SRV depended on the 
combination of diverse farm and off-farm activities, of which rice pro-
duction was the most important one. The two main objectives that were 
shared by the interviewed farmers were to ensure household food se-
curity and to increase farm profitability. Farmers also considered labour 
as an essential resource that needed to be carefully divided among farm 
activities,  family,  community  and  religious  events,  and  off-farm  job 
opportunities. Farmers reported how their decision-making was often 
limited  by  biophysical,  financial,  organisational,  and  technical  con-
straints as well as market price fluctuations. Under the current circum-
stances, vegetable cropping generated more profit than rice production 
although it was self-financed, inefficient, and required more workforce. 

AgriculturalSystems193(2021)10321111A. Brosseau et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Both  farmers'  interviews  and  the  modelling  results  suggested  that 
farmers would be unlikely to increase or even maintain the area of rice 
double cropping, which has been strongly promoted by the Senegalese 
government. Instead, farmers would rather keep investing in vegetable 
and livestock production. To align government priority of ensuring na-
tional food security and farmers' objectives and constraints in the SRV, 
policy-based and technological interventions may focus on an integral 
agronomic research and support assistance for farmers in the vegetable 
and  livestock  sector,  while  exploring  with  farmers  complementary 
alternative to ensure national food security. 
Declaration of Competing Interest 

Ditzler, L., Komarek, A.M., Chiang, T.W., Alvarez, S., Chatterjee, S.A., Timler, C., 

No conflict of interest. 

Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by the CGIAR Research Program (CRP) on 
rice agri-food systems. The contribution of JCJG was supported by the 
Senior  Expert  program  of  the  Dutch  Science  Council  (NWO),  grant 
number 17222. 
Appendix A. Supplementary data 

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 

Barbi´ero, L., Mohamedou, A.O., Laperrousaz, C., Furian, S., Cunnac, S., 2004. Polyphasic 

org/10.1016/j.agsy.2021.103211. 
References 
Ajayi, O.C., Akinnifesi, F.K., Sileshi, G., Chakeredza, S., 2007. Adoption of renewable soil 
fertility replenishment technologies in the southern African region: lessons learnt 
and the way forward. Nat. Resour. Forum 31, 306–317. https://doi.org/10.1111/ 
j.1477-8947.2007.00163.x. 
Bado, V.B., Aw, A., Ndiaye, M., 2010. Long-term effect of continuous cropping of 
irrigated rice on soil and yield trends in the Sahel of West Africa. Nutr. Cycl. 
Agroecosyst. 88, 133–141. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10705-010-9355-7. 
Bado, V.B., Djaman, K., Val`ere, M.C., 2018. Managing fertilizer recommendations in rice- 
based cropping systems challenges and strategic approaches. In: Bationo, A., 
Ngaradoum, D., Youl, S., Lompo, F., Fening, J. (Eds.), Improving the Profitability, 
Sustainability and Efficiency of Nutrients Through Site Specific Fertilizer 
Recommendations in West Africa Agro-Ecosystems, pp. 24–50. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/978-3-319-58789-9_3. 
origin of salinity in the Senegal delta and middle valley. Catena 58, 101–124. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.catena.2004.03.003. 
Bonnefond, P., 1982. L’introduction de la culture irrigu´ee sur les rives s´en´egalaises du 
bassin du fleuve S´en´egal. Econ. Rural. 147–148, 72–78. https://doi.org/10.3406/ 
ecoru.1982.2842. 
Busetto, L., Zwart, S.J., Boschetti, M., 2019. Analysing spatial–temporal changes in rice 
cultivation practices in the Senegal River Valley using MODIS time-series and the 
PhenoRice algorithm. Int. J. Appl. Earth Obs. Geoinf. 75, 15–28. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jag.2018.09.016. 
exploration method for hierarchical systems design under uncertainty. Eng. Optim. 
40, 287–307. https://doi.org/10.1080/03052150701742201. 
Cortez-Arriola, J., Groot, J.C.J., Am´endola Massiotti, R.D., Scholberg, J.M.S., Valentina 
Mariscal Aguayo, D., Tittonell, P., Rossing, W.A.H., 2014. Resource use efficiency 
and farm productivity gaps of smallholder dairy farming in North-West Michoac´an, 
Mexico. Agric. Syst. 126, 15–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2013.11.001. 
Crespo, O., Bergez, J.E., Garcia, F., 2010. Multiobjective optimization subject to 
uncertainty: application to irrigation strategy management. Comput. Electron. Agric. 
74, 145–154. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2010.07.009. 
David-Benz, H., Seck, A., 2018. Am´eliorer la qualit´e de l’oignon au S´en´egal: promouvoir 
la contractualisation et autres mesures transversales. In: Rapport d’analyse de 
politique, SAPAA (projet de Suivi et Analyse des Politiques Agricoles et 
Alimentaires). FAO, Rome.  
De Mey, Y., Demont, M., Diagne, M., 2012. Estimating bird damage to rice in Africa: 
evidence from the Senegal River Valley. J. Agric. Econ. 63, 175–200. https://doi. 
org/10.1111/j.1477-9552.2011.00323.x. 
De Vries, M.E., Leffelaar, P.A., Sakan´e, N., Bado, B.V., Giller, K.E., 2011. Adaptability of 
irrigated rice to temperature change in Sahelian environments. Exp. Agric. 47, 
69–87. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0014479710001328. 
Demont, M., Rizzotto, A.C., 2012. Policy sequencing and the development of rice value 
chains in Senegal. Dev. Policy Rev. 30, 451–472. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467- 
7679.2012.00584.x. 

Choi, H.-J., Mcdowell, D.L., Allen, J.K., Mistree, F., 2008. An inductive design 

Diagne, M., Demont, M., Seck, P.A., Diaw, A., 2013. Self-sufficiency policy and irrigated 
rice productivity in the Senegal River Valley. Food Secur. 5, 55–68. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s12571-012-0229-5. 
Raneri, J.E., Estrada-Carmona, N., Kennedy, G., Groot, J.C.J., 2019. A model to 
examine farm household trade-offs and synergies with an application to smallholders 
in Vietnam. Agric. Syst. 173, 49–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2019.02.008. 
Djaman, K., Balde, A.B., Rudnick, D.R., Ndiaye, O., Irmak, S., 2017. Long-term trend 
analysis in climate variables and agricultural adaptation strategies to climate change 
in the Senegal River basin. Int. J. Climatol. 37, 2873–2888. https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/joc.4885. 
Ellis, F., 2000. The determinants of rural livelihood diversification in developing 
countries. J. Agric. Econ. 51, 289–302. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1477-9552.2000. 
tb01229.x. 
Estrada-Carmona, N., Raneri, J.E., Alvarez, S., Timler, C., Chatterjee, S.A., Ditzler, L., 
Kennedy, G., Remans, R., Brouwer, I., van den Berg, K.B., Talsma, E.F., Groot, J.C.J., 
2020. A model-based exploration of farm-household livelihood and nutrition 
indicators to guide nutrition-sensitive agriculture interventions. Food Secur. 12, 
59–81. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12571-019-00985-0. 
Flores-Sanchez, D., Kleine Koerkamp-Rabelista, J., Navarro-Garza, H., Lantinga, E.A., 
Groot, J.C.J., Kropff, M.J., Rossing, W.A.H., 2011. Diagnosis for ecological 
intensification of maize-based smallholder farming systems in the Costa Chica. 
Mexico. Nutr. Cycl. Agroecosystems 91, 185–205. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10705- 
011-9455-z. 
García-Bola˜nos, M., Borgia, C., Poblador, N., Dia, M., Seyid, O.M.V., Mateos, L., 2011. 
Performance assessment of small irrigation schemes along the Mauritanian banks of 
the Senegal River. Agric. Water Manag. 98, 1141–1152. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
agwat.2011.02.008. 
Gay, J.P., Dancette, C., 1995. La diversification des cultures. In: Pascal, Boivin, 
Ibrahim, Dia, Andr´e, Lericollais, Christophe, Poussin Jean, Christian, Santoir, 
Mohamed, Seck Sidi (Eds.), Nianga, Laboratoire de l’agriculture Irrigu´ee En 
Moyenne Vall´ee Du S´en´egal, 281. ORSTOM, ISRA, Paris, pp. 281–300. 
Groot, J.C.J., Jellema, A., Rossing, W.A.H., 2010. Designing a hedgerow network in a 
multifunctional agricultural landscape: balancing trade-offs among ecological 
quality, landscape character and implementation costs. Eur. J. Agron. 32, 112–119. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2009.07.002. 
Groot, J.C.J., Oomen, G.J.M., Rossing, W.A.H., 2012. Multi-objective optimization and 
design of farming systems. Agric. Syst. 110, 63–77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
agsy.2012.03.012. 
Haefele, S.M., Wopereis, M.C.S., Donovan, C., 2002a. Farmers’ perceptions, practices and 
performance in a Sahelian irrigated rice scheme. Exp. Agric. 38, 197–210. https:// 
doi.org/10.1017/S001447970200025X. 
Haefele, S.M., Wopereis, M.C.S., Wiechmann, H., 2002b. Long-term fertility experiments 
for irrigates rice in the West African Sahel: agronomic results. Food Crop. Res. 78, 
119–131. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-4290(02)00117-X. 
Haefele, S.M., Wopereis, M.C.S., Schloebohm, A.M., Wiechmann, H., 2004. Long-term 
fertility experiments for irrigated rice in the West African Sahel: effect on soil 
characteristics. Food Crop. Res. 85, 61–77. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-4290 
(03)00153-9. 
Increasing rice productivity through improved nutrient use in Africa. In: 
Marco, Wopereis, Johnson David, E., Nourollah, Ahmadi, Eric, Tollens, 
Abdulai, Jalloh (Eds.), Realizing Africa’s Rice Promise. Centre Du Riz Pour l’Afrique, 
CABI, Wallingford, pp. 250–264 (ISBN 978-1-84593-812-3).  
Huat, J., David-Benz, H., 2000. La tomate d’industrie au S´en´egal : performance de la 
production et enjeux pour la fili`ere. In: Legoupil, J.C., Dancette, C., Maïga, I.M., 
NDiaye, K.M. (Eds.), Pour Un D´eveloppement Durable de l’agriculture Irrigu´ee Dans 
La Zone Soudano-Sah´elienne. CORAF-PSI, CIRAD, CNRADA, ISRA, INRAN, IER, IRD, 
Dakar : PSI-CORAF, pp. 167–187. 
Holzworth, D., Huth, N.I., Hargreaves, J.N.G., Meinke, H., Hochman, Z., McLean, G., 
Verburg, K., Snow, V., Dimes, J.P., Silburn, M., Wang, E., Brown, S., Bristow, K.L., 
Asseng, S., Chapman, S., McCown, R.L., Freebairn, D.M., Smith, C.J., 2003. An 
overview of APSIM, a model designed for farming systems simulation. Eur. J. Agron. 
18, 267–288. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0223-5234(03)00100-4. 
Keay, R., 1959. Vegetation Map of Africa South of the Tropic of Cancer. Oxford Univ. 
Press, Oxford (Great Britain), p. 24. https://doi.org/10.2307/212291. 
Kozicka, M., Gotor, E., Ocimati, W., de Jager, T., Kikulwe, E., Groot, J.C.J., 2020. 
Responding to future regime shifts with agrobiodiversity: a multi-level perspective 
on small-scale farming in Uganda. Agric. Syst. 183, 102864. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.agsy.2020.102864. 
balances under the system of rice intensification and recommended management 
practices in the Sahel. Food Crop. Res. 130, 155–167. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
fcr.2012.02.003. 
Krupnik, T.J., Shennan, C., Settle, W.H., Demont, M., Ndiaye, A.B., Rodenburg, J., 
2012b. Improving irrigated rice production in the Senegal River valley through 
experiential learning and innovation. Agric. Syst. 109, 101–112. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.agsy.2012.01.008. 
Lemaire, G., Giroud, B., Bathily, B., Lecomte, P., Corniaux, C., 2019. Toward integrated 
crop-livestock systems in west africa: a project for dairy production along Senegal 
river. In: Agroecosystem Diversity: Reconciling Contemporary Agriculture and 
Environmental Quality, pp. 275–285. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-811050- 
8.00017-0. 

Haefele, S.M., Saito, K., N’Diaye, M.K., Mussgnug, F., Nelson, A., Wopereis, M.C.S., 2013. 

Krupnik, T.J., Shennan, C., Rodenburg, J., 2012a. Yield, water productivity and nutrient 

Keating, B.A., Carberry, P.S., Hammer, G.L., Probert, M.E., Robertson, M.J., 

AgriculturalSystems193(2021)10321112A. Brosseau et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

MAER, 2014. Programme d'acc´el´eration de la cadence de l'agriculture s´en´egalaise 

Naudin, K., Scopel, E., Andriamandroso, A.L.H., Rakotosolofo, M., Andriamarosoa 

(PRACAS). Available at. https://www.ipar.sn/IMG/pdf/pracas_version_finale_offici 
ele.pdf. 
Mandryk, M., Reidsma, P., Kanellopoulos, A., Groot, J.C.J., Van Ittersum, M.K., 2014. 
The role of farmers’ objectives in current farm practices and adaptation preferences: 
a case study in Flevoland, the Netherlands. Reg. Environ. Chang. 14, 1463–1478. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10113-014-0589-9. 
Meijer, S.S., Catacutan, D., Ajayi, O.C., Sileshi, G.W., Nieuwenhuis, M., 2014. The role of 
knowledge, attitudes and perceptions in the uptake of agricultural and agroforestry 
innovations among smallholder farmers in sub-Saharan Africa. Int. J. Agric. Sustain. 
13, 40–54. https://doi.org/10.1080/14735903.2014.912493. 
Mishra, R.K., Jaiswal, R.K., Kumar, D., Saabale, P.R., Singh, A., 2014. Management of 
major diseases and insect pests of onion and garlic: a comprehensive review. J. Plant 
Breed. Crop Sci. 6, 160–170. https://doi.org/10.5897/jpbcs2014.0467. 
Ratsimbazafy, N.R.S., Rakotozandriny, J.N., Salgado, P., Giller, K.E., 2012. Trade- 
offs between biomass use and soil cover. The case of rice-based cropping systems in 
the Lake Alaotra Region of Madagascar. Exp. Agric. 48, 194–209. https://doi.org/ 
10.1017/S001447971100113X. 
Naudin, K., Bruelle, G., Salgado, P., Penot, E., Scopel, E., Lubbers, M., de Ridder, N., 
Giller, K.E., 2015. Trade-offs around the use of biomass for livestock feed and soil 
cover in dairy farms in the Alaotra lake region of Madagascar. Agric. Syst. 134, 
36–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2014.03.003. 
Paul, B.K., Birnholz, C., Timler, C., Michalscheck, M., Koge, J., Groot, J.C.J., Sommer, R., 
2015. Assessing and Improving Organic Matter, Nutrient Dynamics and Profitability 
of Smallholder Farms in Ethiopia and Kenya: Proof of Concept of Using the Whole 
Farm Model FarmDESIGN for Trade-off Analysis and Prioritization of GIZ 
Development Interventions. https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.1.4877.1929. 
PNUE, 2005. Evaluation int´egr´ee de l'impact de la lib´eralisation du commerce: une ´etude 
de cas sur la fili`ere du riz au S´en´egal. Available at. https://unep.ch/etb/publications 
/intAssessment/Senegal.pdf. 
Ponsioen, T.C., Hengsdijk, H., Wolf, J., Van Ittersum, M.K., R¨otter, R.P., Thuc Son, T., 
Laborte, A.G., 2006. TechnoGIN, a tool for exploring and evaluating resource use 
efficiency of cropping systems in east and Southeast Asia. Agric. Syst. 87, 80–100. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2004.11.006. 
Poussin, J.C., Diallo, Y., Legoupil, J.C., Sow, A., 2005. Increase in rice productivity in the 
Senegal River valley due to improved collective management of irrigation schemes. 
Agron. Sustain. Dev. 25, 225–236. https://doi.org/10.1051/agro:2005021. 
Poussin, J.C., Diallo, Y., Legoupil, J.C., 2006. Improved collective decision-making in 
action for irrigated rice farmers in the Senegal River valley. Agric. Syst. 89, 299–323. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2005.09.006. 
SAED, 2012. Fiche technique de la riziculture. Available at. http://www.fao.org/filea 
dmin/user_upload/spid/docs/Senegal/APRAO_Senegal_FicheTechniqueRiziculture. 
pdf (last accessed 01 June 2018).  
Saito, K., Diack, S., Dieng, I., N’Diaye, M.K., 2015a. On-farm testing of a nutrient 
management decision-support tool for rice in the Senegal River valley. Comput. 
Electron. Agric. 116, 36–44. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2015.06.008. 

Saito, K., Dieng, I., Toure, A.A., Somado, E.A., Wopereis, M.C.S., 2015b. Rice yield 

Saito, K., Vandamme, E., Johnson, J.M., Tanaka, A., Senthilkumar, K., Dieng, I., 

Shepherd, T.G., 2000. Visual Soil Assessment. Volume 1. Field Guide for Cropping and 

growth analysis for 24 African countries over 1960–2012. Glob. Food Sec. 5, 62–69. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gfs.2014.10.006. 
Akakpo, C., Gbaguidi, F., Segda, Z., Bassoro, I., Lamare, D., Gbakatchetche, H., 
Abera, B., Jaiteh, F., Bam, R., Dogbe, W., S´ekou, K., Rabeson, R., Kamissoko, N., 
Mossi, I.M., Tarfa, B.D., Bakare, S.O., Kalisa, A., Baggie, I., Kajiru, G.J., Ablede, K., 
Ayeva, T., Nanfumba, D., Wopereis, M.C.S., 2019. Yield-limiting macronutrients for 
rice in sub-Saharan Africa. Geoderma 338, 546–554. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
geoderma.2018.11.036. 
ˇSebek, L.B.J., Gosselink, J.M.J., 2006. Energie- en eiwitbehoefte van schapen. Available 
at. http://library.wur.nl/WebQuery/wurpubs/fulltext/15665 (last accessed 01 June 
2018).  
Seck, P.A., Tour´e, A., Coulibaly, J., Diagne, A., Wopereis, M.C.S., 2013. Africa’s rice 
economy before and after the 2008 rice crisis realiz. In: Africa’s Rice Promise, 
pp. 24–34. https://doi.org/10.1079/9781845938123.0024. 
Pastoral Grazing on Flat to Rolling Country. horizons.mw & Landcare Research, 
Palmerston North (84 p. ISBN 1-877221-92-9).  
Soullier, G., Moustier, P., 2018. Impacts of contract farming in domestic grain chains on 
farmer income and food insecurity. Contrasted evidence from Senegal. Food Policy 
79, 179–198. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodpol.2018.07.004. 
St¨ockle, C.O., Donatelli, M., Nelson, R., 2003. CropSyst, a cropping systems simulation 
model. Eur. J. Agron. 18, 289–307 (doi:Pii S1161-0301(02)00109-0).  
Tanaka, A., Diagne, M., Saito, K., 2015. Causes of yield stagnation in irrigated lowland 
rice systems in the Senegal River Valley: application of dichotomous decision tree 
analysis. Food Crop. Res. 176, 99–107. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fcr.2015.02.020. 
Tourrand, J.-F., 2000. L’´elevage dans la r´evolution agricole au Waalo, delta du fleuve 
S´en´egal. CIRAD, Montpellier (165 p. ISBN 2-87614-404-2).  
Tsujimoto, Y., Rakotoson, T., Tanaka, A., Saito, K., 2019. Challenges and opportunities 
for improving N use efficiency for rice production in sub-Saharan Africa. Plant Prod. 
Sci. 22, 413–427. https://doi.org/10.1080/1343943X.2019.1617638. 
Van den Broeck, G., Maertens, M., 2017. Moving up or moving out? Insights into rural 
development and poverty reduction in Senegal. World Dev. 99, 95–109. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2017.07.009. 
van Oort, P.A.J., 2018. Mapping abiotic stresses for rice in Africa: drought, cold, iron 
toxicity, salinity and sodicity. Food Crop. Res. 219, 55–75. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.fcr.2018.01.016. 
van Oort, P.A.J., Balde, A.B., Diagne, M., Dingkuhn, M., Manneh, B., Muller, B., Sow, A., 
Stuerz, S., 2016. Intensification of an irrigated rice system in Senegal: crop rotations, 
climate risks, sowing dates and varietal adaptation options. Eur. J. Agron. 80, 
168–181. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2016.06.012. 
Whipps, J.M., Budge, S.P., 2000. Effect of humidity on development of tomato powdery 
mildew (Oidium lycopersici) in the glasshouse. Eur. J. Plant Pathol. 106, 395–397. 
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1008745630393. 

AgriculturalSystems193(2021)10321113