Family Prestige as Old-Age Security: 

Evidence from Rural Senegal 

Jean-Luc Demonsant1

May 2007 

 

 
 
 
 

 

ABSTRACT 

The crux of this paper is to find out the motivations of migrants to support their 
ageing  parents  in  the  village.  I  conducted  a  household  survey  in  the  Senegal 
River Valley designed to take due account of the local socio-political structure. 
The empirical results suggest that while belonging to a prestigious family lowers 
the probability of migrating, it raises the probability of frequently remitting to 
the  patriarch.  Thus  migration  can  either  be  seen  as  an  individual  decision  to 
escape  from  a  poor  social  position  or,  conversely,  as  a  family  decision  to 
maintain its dominant position in the village. 

 
 
Keywords: Migration; Remittances; Social Stratification; Old-Age Support. 
 
JEL Classification: O12; D12; J62 
 

                                                 
1 ARQADE, Toulouse School of Economics, Manufacture des Tabacs - Aile Jean-Jacques Laffont, 21 allées 
de  Brienne,  31000  Toulouse,  France;  jean-luc.demonsant@univ-tlse1.fr.  For  my  research  in  Senegal,  I 
benefited  from  financial  support  from  both  the  ministry  in  charge  of  Higher  Education  (Aires  Culturelles 
grant, 2001) and the ministry of Foreign Affairs (Lavoisier grant, 2003-04). First of all, I would like to thank 
my supervisor, Jean-Paul Azam for his encouraging support and insightful suggestions. I also thank seminar 
participants in Toulouse, Dakar, Paris and Bordeaux for providing useful comments. Last but not least, I am 
extremely  grateful  to  Monica  Ramirez  and  Anthony  Stenton  for  doing  a  great  job  in  tidying  up  stylistic 
mistakes on previous drafts of this paper. I am solely responsible for all remaining omissions or errors. 

 

1

‘When a young man considers migrating, he must keep in mind the day when he will come 
back.’2

INTRODUCTION 

In  contrast  to  cases  of  elderly  abuse  reported  in  many  developing  countries  (see  WHO 
2002),  some  migrants  do  make  huge  transfers  to  their  elderly  parents.  What  kind  of 
enforcement  mechanisms  exist  to  make  them  abide  by  this  sharing  rule  despite 
geographical distance? What do the older parents have to offer in return? My study does 
not pretend to draw universal conclusions on migration and remittances behaviour, but is 
rather  rooted  in  the  local  cultural  context  of  my  fieldwork  in  rural  Northern  Senegal, 
although it could well be extended to other types of village societies featuring gerontocracy 
embedded in a social stratification. In a broad sense, it seems rather irrelevant to study rural 
household  economics  without  taking  due  account  of  the  socio-political  structure  of  the 
village.  For  instance,  too  often  emphasis  has  been  placed  on  ethnic  diversity,  ignoring 
social divisions within ethnic groups. However, it is well documented that many Sahelian 
societies  are  based  on  a  so-called  ‘caste  system’,  which  is  still  very  pervasive  in  some 
areas.  Strikingly,  ethnic  groups  that  historically  make  up  the  majority  of  Sub-Saharan 
migrants  in  France,  originate  from  the  same  area  -the  Senegal  River  Valley-  and  are 
renowned  for  being  very  attached  to  their  traditions,  and  in  particular  their  officially 
abolished  social  stratification.  Here  is  some  insight  into  why  this  may  not  be  purely 
fortuitous. On the one hand, the fact that high status families have greater needs in terms of 
prestige expenses to signal that they deserve their rank has surprisingly been overlooked 
when  studying  migration  economics3.  Without  any  doubt  this  holds  true  anywhere:  our 
Western  society’s  consumption  rites  have  great  similarities  with  conspicuous  spending 
which  has  been  described  by  anthropologists  in  other  non-Western  societies  (i.e.  the 
‘potlatch’...).  Furthermore,  this  should  even  be  stronger  in  highly  hierarchical  societies, 
where belonging to a high status family gives rise to substantial privileges. On the other 
hand, it has previously been argued that the aspiration to inherit may be a strong motive for 
remittances. If there are no potential valuable physical bequests, the family status becomes 
the desired symbolic bequest. For instance, in her Ph.D. thesis, Flore Gubert showed how 
among  the  Soninke,  aristocratic  families  send  out  migrants  to  insure  their  pride  (Gubert 
2000). I find comparable but slightly different results studying old-age support among the 
neighbouring Haalpulaaren. These results yield different policy implications. 
Nevertheless, when studying old-age support, the only relevant case for economists arises 
when the child leaves his parents’ home. Transfers between separate households have the 
advantage of being observable whereas daily and continuous exchanges among coresidents 
are  almost  impossible  to  disentangle,  or  indeed  to  measure.  In  developing  countries  it  is 
mostly the case that coresidence is the norm, except when migration enters the picture. One 
cannot conclude that non-migrants are not supporting their parents, but when leaving his 
parent’s home, the migrant may also turn his back on his family. So, the focus will be on 
migrants and their remitting behaviour. As in many village societies, gerontocracy is the 
rule within the local political power. However, this may lead to erroneous predictions as far 
as old-age support is concerned. Indeed, if elders drew their authority from strong peer and 
                                                 
2. Pulaar saying, my translation. 
3. With the notable exception of Lucas and Stark (1985). 

 

2

face-to-face pressure in the village, distance should trigger rebellion. 
Results from my survey data show that both migration and remittance choices of a son are 
linked with the social ranking of his father4 within the traditional village society. Indeed, it 
appears that belonging to a low status family raises the probability of migrating, whereas 
the migrants from high status families are more likely to remit. Why are low status migrants 
more likely to turn their back on their family while high status migrants often constitute the 
main  family  support?  In  reality,  two  opposing  motives  for  migrating  seem  to  come  into 
play, depending on the position of the migrant’s family in the social ladder of the village. 
Migration  can  be  seen  as  a  means  either  to  escape  from  a  poor  social  position,  or 
conversely to maintain one’s dominant position. The first case is very similar to Luke and 
Munshi  (2005),  where  the  most  disadvantaged  group  -  in  the  South  Indian  context,  low 
caste women - migrates to gain social mobility. By contrast, in the second case, the migrant 
intends to come back in the village to benefit from the advantageous position of his father. 
As a result, he will have to keep up his own rank by giving his parents the financial means 
to sustain their status. As in Gubert (2000), remittances are embedded in a broader family 
arrangement  aimed  at  insuring  the  pride  of  the  family.  In  this  paper,  I  will  focus  on  the 
enforcement mechanisms ageing parents have at hand to elicit the loyalty of their migrant 
son to the family contract. 
In the second section, I will position my framework in the microeconomics literature on 
transfer  motives  and,  in  particular,  old-age  support  in  developing  countries.  The  third 
section draws on the cultural context of the fieldwork, i.e. the Haalpulaaren of the Senegal 
River Middle Valley, to place this study in perspective with other social sciences, and my 
own  field  experience.  In  the  fourth  section,  I  will  briefly  describe  the  theoretical 
framework, emphasizing the role of family prestige as an enforcement device of old-age 
support  arrangements.  The  fifth  section  displays  the  empirical  strategy  -  from  the  data 
collection process to the econometric specification - developed to highlight the relevance of 
this hypothesis. The sixth part will present the results based on my household survey, along 
with additional qualitative evidence that support this scenario. Finally, I will conclude with 
some policy implications on migration and development. 

REVIEW OF MICROECONOMIC LITERATURE 

Old-age support and social status 

Cases  of  elder  abuse  can  be  found  in  Africa  despite  mainstream  opinion  that  respect 
towards elders is the norm (see Ferreira 2005). Miguel (2003), for instance, analyzed the 
extreme  situation  in  which  elderly  widows  were  either  killed  or  expelled  at  times  of 
hardships. He highlighted the positive correlation between drought shocks and increases in 
numbers of witch killings. On the other (brighter!) end of the spectrum, one can reasonably 
wonder why migrants send substantial parts of their earnings to their ageing parents who 
stayed behind in the village, and do not seem to be in a position to reciprocate. 
Indeed,  many  studies  point  out  how  poor  elders’  livelihood  highly  depends  on  family 
support in many developing countries as highlighted in Lloyd-Sherlock (2000). It has been 
argued that high fertility rates are due to dependence on children for old-age support (see 
for  instance  Nugent  1985).This  is  due  to  the  absence  of  any  suitable  social  security 
schemes,  health  insurance  as  well  as  any  formal  pension  program.  The  elderly  becomes 
                                                 

4. I will indeed focus on father to son relationship as Haalpulaar is a patrilineal society. 

 

3

dependent on either their asset stocks, or their own labour income, or else their children’s 
support.  Nevertheless  in  many  developing  countries  since  both  financial  institutions  and 
property rights are insecure, and the currency may be subject to inflation or nominal shocks 
such as devaluation, there exists no reliable form of asset accumulation whatsoever. Hence 
with low asset stocks, and when they are unable to work any longer, individuals reaching 
old-age  do  depend  entirely  on  their  children.  The  number  and  gender  of  children,  along 
with  the  living  arrangements  (inter-generational  coresidence  or  separate  households)  are 
important  determinants  of  the  welfare  of  the  elders.  These  traditional  family  support 
systems  for  elderly  people  are  commonly  believed  to  be  working  relatively  well  due  to 
specific  cultural  behaviour  such  as  respect  for  elders,  and  the  existence  of  strong  family 
ties.  Such  analysis  is  based  rather  on  intuition  than  on  serious  empirical  research. 
Furthermore, economic and social change may gradually put more strain on these informal 
mechanisms. 
In semi-arid rural areas, incomes from agriculture are rather precarious, because of weather 
shocks (periodical times of drought during the dry season followed by floods during the 
rainy season), or parasite invasions such as recent locusts invasions in the Sahel. In these 
countries,  malnutrition  is  very  common,  particularly  during  the  lean  season  (soudure  in 
French): the period when the harvest from the previous year has been exhausted and the 
next season’s harvest is not yet ripe5. 
The  quasi-absence  of  both  formal  credit  and  insurance  markets  leads  to  a  variety  of 
informal coinsurance arrangements in village economies6. Given that positive correlations 
in  weather  outcomes  diminish  with  distance7,  households  can  allocate  some  members  to 
different  sectors  via  migration.  Rosenzweig  and  Stark  (1989)  found,  in  rural  India,  that 
marriages of daughters in distant villages provided some kind of insurance mechanism for 
the family. Furthermore, despite the fact that urban and foreign jobs present some kind of 
risks too, these are not correlated with local activities. Indeed, the new economics of labour 
migration  introduced  by  Stark  (1991),  views  migration  as  an  intrafamily  coinsurance 
arrangement aimed at providing remittances in case of drops in rural incomes in exchange 
for assistance in case of unemployment, or covering the expensive costs of migrating (i.e. 
travelling ticket plus smuggling fees for illegal migrations). 
If this were the case, one should find a negative correlation between amounts transferred 
and  the  recipient’s  pre-transfer  income.  It  is  noticeable  that,  in  this  regard,  a  perfect 
insurance mechanism yields the same result as the pure altruism case. What if remittances 
are  not  linked  with  the  actual  income  of  the  family  who  stayed  behind,  but  rather  their 
social needs: family or religious expenses? Indeed in Stark’s (1991) framework, the social 
status  of  the  family  should  not  enter  the  picture.  Nevertheless  it  has  been  long 
acknowledged  that  individuals  value  the  esteem  of  others.  Adam  Smith  wrote:  ‘It  is  not 
wealth  that  men  desire  but  the  consideration  and  good  opinions  that  wait  upon  riches’. 
Expressions just as the rat race or keeping up with the Joneses appear in many influential 
economists’ writings in different contexts (in both developed and developing countries). In 

                                                 

5. In the sample, over 45% of families had suffered days of forced fasting at least once in past 2 years. 
6.Some authors suggest it may well be the other way around: efficient intra-familial arrangements prevent 

the formation of those markets (see Stark 1995 and Kranton 1996). 

7. In the words of Rosenzweig (1988). 

 

4

hierarchical caste societies this becomes even more relevant, as belonging to a high status 
caste yields broader perspectives. As a consequence, high-status families are eager to keep 
up with what is expected from their status: they must face high conspicuous spending to 
signal that they deserve their rank. 
The survey was conducted among Haalpulaaren families who are known for still being very 
attached to the strict hierarchical organization of their society. Following Gubert (2000) I 
found that the family is not only insuring its income but also its pride: 
The risk against which the family seeks some insurance is not just the loss of utility due to 
a consumption shortfall entailed by a negative shock. The family is in fact protecting itself 
against the shame that would affect the whole clan if the family’s standard of living was to 
fall below some norm, corresponding to it social status (Azam & Gubert 2005). 
If distance provides some kind of risk diversification, it yields enforcement problems for 
both parties involved too. Azam and Gubert (2005) studied the moral hazard problem faced 
by the migrant: in the village, they showed how families who can rely on remittances, tend 
to shirk on agricultural activities, and underreport their incomes to their migrants. 
I will now turn carefully to the family issue: how can the family make sure that the migrant 
will remit? Indeed, when the migrant is a young son, and the family left behind primarily 
his old parents8 , they do not seem to be in a position to assist him in return as the mutual 
insurance contract stipulates, in case of unemployment for instance. 

Commitment without reciprocity 

In  village  economies,  it  is  believed  that  low  monitoring  costs,  along  with  concerns  for 
reputation  due  to  repeated  interactions,  perform  a  good  enforcement  device.  Coate  and 
Ravallion (1993) describe how enforcement can occur thanks to reciprocity. Nevertheless 
in  their  model,  there  is  an  a  priori  symmetry  between  agents  coming  into  play.  With  an 
infinite horizon, at each period they randomly find themselves either in a position to help or 
in need of help from the other. Thus, if it were the case, one should observe transfers in 
both directions over time. ‘So, why individual with a high and secure revenue will share it 
with  others  while  they  do  not  ever  benefit  from  the  mutual assistance  arrangements?’  in 
Ambec’s  (2000)  words.  The  same  holds  true  in  my  framework,  where  the  situation  is 
unbalanced as the son cannot expect any support from his old parents who stayed behind in 
return  for  his  remittances.  Let  us  review  all  the  mechanisms  that  ageing  parents  could 
possibly use to prevent their migrating son from defaulting. 
Firstly, all enforcement issues could be wiped out, if altruism or self-enforcing mechanism 
came into play. Altruism could indeed solve the puzzle, but all empirical studies show that 
the Pure Altruism model is never robust to data9. This underlines the fact that there is room 
for other types of motivation. Altruism also has some adverse side effects. First, the love 
the parents feel towards their son could make their punishment strategies less credible, as 
mentioned by Bernheim and Stark (1988). Moreover, parents could rely on their children’s 
altruism,  knowing  that  in  case  of  hardship  they  would  remit  more.  As  a  result,  parents 
would not even try to take measures aimed at insuring themselves against negative shocks. 

                                                 

8.  Though  we  will  see  that  in  our  sample  survey,  many  migrants  have  also  other  dependants  (wife, 

children) left in the household, so that there is room for some kind of exchange motive described later. 
9. See Laferrère and Wolff (2006) for a good review of the empirical literature on transfers' motives. 

 

5

This is the Samaritan’s dilemma issue addressed by Coate (1995)10. So, apart from love and 
affection, what is the benefit to the son in taking good care of his old parents? Economists 
have  tried  since  Samuelson  (1958)  to  model  self-enforcing  inter-generational  social 
contract.  There  is  an  obvious  problem  in  the  Children  as  Old-Age  Security  model:  if 
parents, who invest in children to elicit their help when reaching old-age, are rational, what 
is  the  rationale  behind  the  children  paying  back  their  parents?  A  detailed  analysis  of 
sustainable  selfish  transfers  between  three  generations  is  the  work  of  Cigno  (1993). 
According to the so-called Family Constitution model, family transfers are seen as informal 
loan arrangements, adults being the only generation to earn a living. They lend to children 
and  repay  their  aging  parents.  It  is  sustainable  if  the  following  family  rule  (a  kind  of 
collective punishment) is applied: One can deny support to one’s own parents if and only if 
they did not themselves take good care of their own parents. Thus the coresidence of grand-
children and grand-parents should be observed along with conspicuous spending by the son 
to take care of his old parents. As Guttman (2001) pointed out, this optimal rule cannot be 
implemented if changes in future economic conditions are foreseen (e.g. the introduction of 
a  reliable  pension  system).  This  is  most  likely  to  be  the  case  in  developing  countries. 
Consequently, this type of model does not seem suitable to our case, though denying the 
rights to future family solidarity, is a threat that could play some role, as we will see further 
on. 
Overall,  this  literature  remains  highly  theoretical  and  has  few  testable  empirical 
implications. Let us now turn to credible parent strategies which seem relevant to our case 
study. 

Some credible enforcement mechanisms 

Practically  speaking,  there  are  several  mechanisms  at  play.  All  contribute  to  make  this 
family arrangement work to some extent and it would be hard and even impossible to say 
that one plays a greater role than the others. Four credible strategies which parents could 
develop at several stages of the parent-child relationship will be briefly reviewed. 
Preference shaping 
Parents  could  invest  in  shaping  their  children’s  propensity  for  being  loyal.  In  his  Nobel 
lecture, Becker (1993) argues that economists have excessively relied on altruism for the 
enforcement  of  inter-generational  contracts  and  suggested  instead  accounting  for  the 
endogenous formation of preferences within the family (Becker 1993 and 1996). Parents try 
to instil a feeling of guilt if children do not respect social norms. In this view, investing in 
religious and traditional educations which inculcate family values would seem promising to 
shape a son’s loyalty. I will return to this later when describing traditional Koranic schools 
in  my  area  of  study.  In  Akerlof’s  (1983)  words,  the  Koranic  school  is  a  ‘loyalty  filter’. 
However,  manipulative  attempts  to  inculcate  loyalty  seem  likely  to  fail.  To  put  it  more 
simply: ‘Do as I say not as I do’ is notoriously ineffective. So, alternatively, parents could 
set the example by taking good care of their own parents. We shall see that the presence of 
own children in the household could induce the migrant to send remittances. 
Migrants’ selection 
                                                 

10.  Coate  recommends  to  send  in-kind  transfers,  such  as  building  irrigation  schemes  in  drought-prone 
areas, instead of cash. Whereas it is implementable from an NGO's point of view, it seems rather unrealistic 
from the migrant's perspective... 

 

6

The patriarch holds precise information on his sons’ character type. He could consequently 
select the most promising ones, i.e. those who combine both high earnings potential and 
degrees  of  loyalty.  I  try  in  my  econometric  implementation  to  account  for  this  selection 
issue by estimating simultaneously migration and remitting behaviours. 
Exchange motive 
As in Lucas and Stark (1985), remittances can be seen as paying for services to the family 
who stayed behind to take care of children or assets of the migrant: cattle, land... In my 
survey  sample,  many  migrants  do  have  dependants  (spouses,  children)  left  in  the 
household, so that there is room for some kind of exchange motive. 
Strategic bequest motive 
Strategic motives can also enter the picture: parents can threaten their children not to leave 
them any inheritance if they are not grateful. Thus children enter a competition to get the 
largest  share  of  the  bequest.  Lucas  and  Stark  (1985)  had  mentioned  it,  but  the  strategic 
bequest  motive11  model  is  thoroughly  described  in  Bernheim,  Schleifer  and  Summers 
(1985). Remitting here is done to secure the bequest. Hoddinott (1994) tested this model on 
rural Kenyan data, where land was the inheritable part at stake. What happens then in a 
changing  society  when  land  ownership  is  no  longer  sought  after?  Furthermore,  in  most 
countries,  inheritance  division  is  settled  by  law.  Islam  for  instance  has  very  precise 
inheritance  sharing  rules:  a  son  gets  one  share  and  a  daughter  gets  half  a  share.  My 
hypothesis  for  the  enforcement  of  this  old-age  support  arrangement  derives  from  the 
Strategic  Bequest  Motive.  It  departs  from  their  work  by  introducing  a  symbolic  bequest 
rather than a physical one, namely: the transmission of the status of the family. The migrant 
values belonging to a prestigious family because it gives him access to the family’s network 
while on migration and when returning to the village he will reap the benefits of the status 
of the family by becoming a notable. 

Other mechanisms 

Nevertheless,  apart  from  these  parent  strategies,  if  the  migrant  is  planning  on  returning, 
reputation concerns may still exist but not as much with the parents as with the community. 
Lucas  and  Stark  (1985)  show  that  this  plays  an  important  role  too.  In  their  view,  the 
migrant may remit ‘to enhance prestige or political influence’ for the days when he will 
return. Taking good care of one’s parents is a hallmark of reliability. We will see later, that 
this could be an incentive for migrants seeking wives within the community. The loss of 
prestige incurred by defaulting sons could also prevent their return for retirement, which is 
central to many African migrants. Last but not least, the desire to be buried at home is an 
additional motive to maintain the social status of the family. It is essential for many Muslim 
migrants, and in particular those from the Senegal River Valley. The main concern is more 
a deep attachment to homeland, than religious grounds. Many migrants associations were 
indeed created in order to collect money for the repatriation of dead bodies12. 
Let  us  now  turn  to  some  cultural  features of  the  surveyed  population  to  better  grasp  the 
intuitions underlying the study. 

THE HAALPULAAR SOCIETY OF MATAM 

11. Not to be mistaken with the strategic motive for remittances specified by Stark (1995) chapter 4, who 

                                                 

refers to high skilled migrants, which is not the case here. 

12. See Petit (2002) in Marseille, France. 

 

7

Geographical position 

The  Senegal  River  constitutes  the  border  between  Senegal  and  Mauritania.  The  Middle 
Valley  is  a  semi-arid  savanna  sandwiched  between  arid  zones  of  Ferlo  and  the  Sahara 
desert. The harsh climate distinguishes two seasons. From June to August is the wet season 
with  frequent  showers  and  river  floods.  The  rest  of  the  year  is  the  dry  season  with 
temperature rising up to 50°C before the first rain. On the fringe of the desert, the soil is 
poor so the most fertile lands lie by the river banks thanks to alluvial deposits due to the 
river’s natural flood cycles. The three main economic activities have always been fishing, 
cattle-herding and agriculture. There are 3 kinds of agriculture: the oldest being rain-fed 
cropping in the uplands (‘diery’) from June to August, and in the lowlands (‘walo’) cereals 
are planted after flood recession from September to December, and the most recent being 
irrigated  cropping.  Main  crops  are  cereals  (mostly  millet,  the  traditional  crop),  rice  (the 
main  cash  crop)  and  various  vegetables  (tomatoes,  squash,  sweet  potatoes...).  The 
introduction of water management facilities has reshaped the profits of these activities. 
During  colonization,  the  French,  and  after  independence,  the  state  both  invested  in  huge 
irrigation projects, and dams. The idea was that floods were unpredictable and sometimes 
devastating for villages on the river banks. Irrigation provides year-around crops and the 
dam is planned to provide electricity to the 3 neighbouring countries, i.e. Mali, Mauritania 
and Senegal. However the results are mitigated as the energy objective is not compatible 
with natural floods cycles: so far, floods are artificially maintained, but peasants fear it will 
not  last.  The  dams  have  also  been  devastating  for  the  fishing  activity,  along  with  the 
frequent droughts, reaching the point where most of the fish consumed in the valley come 
from  the  ocean,  usually  dried.  Fishing  has  become  a  marginal  secondary  activity  for 
fishermen who now engage in boat transportation which becomes a necessity when roads 
are flooded, as is usually the case for 3 to 4 months a year. Initially irrigation was very 
promising  but  the  cost  of  oil  and  maintenance  for  motor-pumps,  along  with  the  cost  of 
fertilizers  and  seeds  make  it  profitable  for  rich  farmers  or  efficient  peasant  cooperatives 
only. For the vast majority of the peasants of the valley it remains impossible to make a 
self-sustainable business out of it. As a consequence, nowadays, there are many schemes 
and water supplies that are badly-kept. In fact, conventional wisdom admits that it is rather 
difficult to make a decent living out of agricultural activities in the valley. In the meantime, 
migrants engage in conspicuous consumption either for religious celebrations or in housing, 
after just a few years abroad. 
Consequently, I collected data on remittance behaviour in the Senegal River middle valley 
where  migration  has  long  been  considered  a  better  strategy  than  working  in  irrigated 
schemes. In this context, the value of ‘physical’ bequests has become close to insignificant 
for a migrant son. 

Historical background of the Haalpulaaren13

The Haalpulaaren14 make up the majority of the inhabitants in the Middle Valley. Towards 
the river delta lay the former Walo empire of the Wolof whereas in the upper valley are the 
Soninke. Haalpulaaren can be found on both banks of the river, further North are the Moors 
                                                 

13. Based on two main sources: MAS (1959) and Wane (1969). 
14. Meaning ‘those who speak Pulaar’, i.e. the language of the Fulbe (‘Peuls’ in French). They are also 

known as ‘Toucouleurs’ (or ‘Tukulors’) which sounds derogatory nowadays... 

 

8

and more to the South in the Ferlo Fulani nomads can be found. Indeed, Haalpulaaren are 
believed to be descendant of Fulani nomads who settled in the valley and mixed with local 
populations (Serer, Wolof, Moore, Soninke...). In the Xth century, the region was referred to 
as  Tekrur  which  is  where  the  name  Tukulors  comes  from15.  It  was  first  annexed  by  the 
Ghana  Empire,  and  then  the  Mali  Empire,  until  Koly  Tengala  Ba  (a  Denyanke  clan  of 
Fulani) in the XVIth century, freed the region from the Manding domination and founded 
the Futa Toro16. Islamization began as early as the IXth century in the area and spread until 
charismatic  religious  leaders  took  power  in  1776.  The  ‘Torrobe’17  revolution  brought  an 
end to two centuries of Denyanke dynasty. In the XIXth century, El Hajj Futyu Umar Tall 
led  a  jihad  recruiting  among  the  Futankobe  to  resist  the  French  army  and  founded  the 
Macina Empire in modern Mali. 
The Haalpulaaren are responsible for spreading Islam all over West-Africa, and are highly 
respected  for  that  in  the  sub-region.  Koly  Tenguela  and  El  Hajj  Umar  are  the  icons  of 
Haalpulaar  pride,  and  descending  from  them  along  with  other  religious  or  political 
figureheads of the Futa is the most sought-after social recognition. Another very important 
aspect of the family’s fame is determined by which social category the family belongs to. 
The Haalpulaar caste system is rather complex, let us now consider its major features. 

Social stratification 

Traditional Haalpulaar society, like many Sahelian societies, (see Tamari, 1991) is based on 
a division into three main social categories: the ‘free born’, the artisans (musicians, metal 
workers...) and the (descendants of) slaves. To give an idea about the complexity of this 
system, Table 1 translated from Wane (1969) summarizes all categories18. 
The use of the term ‘caste’ is rather controversial, as it usually refers to the different artisan 
social sub-categories. In this paper, I refer to the caste system as the whole stratified social 
organization. 
Of course nowadays slavery has been abolished and artisans do not necessarily work in the 
branch of their group’s specialization, but still this classification has some meaning today. 
Indeed both the artisans and the descendants of slaves suffer from discrimination. Today, 
this caste-based discrimination mainly consists of marriage constraints, as well as denied 
access to land, and to political and religious leadership19. In the next section, we shall turn 
to a brief description of each category, and the main subcategories. 
The  free-born  (sometimes  called  ‘nobles’,  ‘Rimbe’  in  Pulaar)  make  up  the  majority  and 
consequently are definitely the most heterogeneous group. The standard designation of the 
‘free-born’  as  ‘nobles’  may  seem  a  little  misleading,  since  this  group  includes  even  the 
most impoverished peasants. Indeed, the hereditary aristocratic lineages make up a minority 
within this category: they are the only families entitled to accede to political power (village 
chieftainship).  Four  main  subgroups  compose  this  first  category  depending  on  the  main 
                                                 

15. According to Wane (1969). 
16. Hence another name for the inhabitants of the region: the Futankobe (‘those of Futa (Toro)’). 
17.  It  means  ‘beggars for  alms’  in  Pulaar,  as  they  were  studying Koran  and  therefore not  economically 

18. Though it is a benchmark in studies of Haalpulaar society, the main criticism of the Wane classification 

productive. 

is that it omits the cattle-breeders, the Fulbe category, as part of the ‘free-born’. 

19. See for instance Sy (2002). I will also report different discrimination experiences towards those groups 

I witnessed during my stays. 

 

9

activity they relate to. At the top of the hierarchy are the ‘Torrobe’ who are the religious 
leaders,  along  with  some  ‘Fulbe’  traditionally  cattle  breeders.  Usually  of  lesser  prestige 
than former sub-categories are the fishermen (‘Subalbe’) and the warriors (‘Sebe’). 
The artisans (‘Nyenbe’) are referred to as the ‘casted’ (‘les casté s’ in French) as this group 
matches best the idea of caste with job specialization (along with the usual endogamous 
feature it shares with the other categories). All the traditional crafts are represented from 
the  blacksmith  (‘Waylibe’)  to  the  leather  workers  (‘Sakebe’)  and  the  wood  workers  ( 
‘Laobe’ ). Along with the craftsmen are the bards (‘Griots’ in French, ‘Aolube’ in Pulaar). 
Nowadays casted families do not necessarily practice in their specialized activity but they 
usually still have been transmitting the know-how of their job. They cannot have access to 
the local political power. 
At the bottom end of the pyramid are the former slaves (‘Maccube’), rather called captives. 
In fact at times of wars and ‘jihads’, prisoners ended up as slaves. As a result, many family 
names  of  slaves  are  of  other  ethnic  group  origins20,  and  as  a  consequence  stigmatized, 
although  many  slaves  took  the  name  of  their  master.  Although  slave  status  was  legally 
banned  over  a  century  ago21,  their  status  has  evolved  slowly.  Nowadays,  in  Haalpulaar 
society  descendants  of  slaves  are  still  expected  to  be  deferential  to  nobles,  to  cook  on 
festive  occasions  and  sometimes  repair  their  former  master’s  house22.  They  distinguish 
themselves by their willingness to work hard. An illustration of their position in the society 
can be found in ‘joking relationships’. Depending on one’s family name, one is allowed to 
tease people from another clan (one’s joking kin) without offending anybody. Usually the 
jokes are very humiliating and are centred on either greed for food or calling the other your 
slave (and the other reciprocates) During my fieldwork, I once had the opportunity to work 
with a man of slave origin who would systematically refuse to interview people belonging 
to his joking kinship. No matter how bright an educated he was, he explicitly told me how 
he felt uncomfortable with such jokes, and did not feel like reciprocating. 
The main form of discrimination is the fact that only the free born and the most important 
artisans  may  traditionally  own  the  most  valuable  lands  by  the  river  banks  (‘walo’  in 
Pulaar). Nowadays, cases can be found of slaves’ families that now own such lands after 
their  former  masters  gave  them  away  but  it  is  still  rather  an  exception.  Regularly  in 
Senegalese  newspapers,  there  are  articles  about  mixed  marriages  (‘inter-castes’)  which 
prove that it is still a scandal, even in the capital city, or abroad23. In villages it is all the 
more  difficult  for  an  artisan  or  the  descendant  of  slaves  to  marry  a  noble  woman.  As  a 
consequence, before a marriage occurs, there is always a preliminary enquiry led by the in-
laws, to make sure of the compatibility between both social categories of the groom and the 
bride. 
In reality, it is never the case that all these categories can be found in one village. Usually 
there are villages founded by fishermen others by warriors, or even slaves usually near to 
nobles’  villages.  Nevertheless,  there  are  some  rules  that  always  apply:  the  Imam  will 
                                                 

20. …and usually of noble origins, as the artisans were not enslaved but kept their specialization. 
21. See Klein (2005) for more details. 
22.  Each  year  after  the  rainy  season,  traditional  mud  houses  need  to  be  repaired,  especially  the  roof.  I 

witnessed this in two different villages during my stay. See for instance Klein (2005) for similar accounts. 

23. It is interesting to look at the frequency of inter-caste marriages as the subject of many discussions in 

Senegalese forums (often of the diaspora). 

 

10

always be chosen among the Torrobe, the village chief and notables among the dominant 
free-born category (fishermen, warriors, Torrobe or Fulbe). These important families have 
usually taken along their dependent families: their former slaves and artisans. 
It  is  clear  that  all  these  social  categories  were  not  fixed,  but  that  they  evolved  as  some 
commoners  have  strategically  been  conferred  a  title  of  nobility  as  a  reward  for  good 
services, or new warriors recruited among former slaves24... It is important to keep in mind 
that these categories corresponded to a genuine need for a specific job allocation during the 
former  era.  The  official  abolition  of  slavery  along  with  the  emergence  of  the  modern 
market economy render this classification outdated on practical grounds. Nevertheless it is 
striking how relevant this classification remains in contemporary Haalpulaar culture. There 
is for instance a set of implicit rules that each group must abide by. These rules are mainly 
driven  by  ‘the  sense  of  honour’  which  is  specific  to  the  nobles.  Let  us  now  turn  to  this 
aspect in details and in its implications. 

The Nobles’ Code of Honour 

There  are  many  ways  for  higher  status  individuals  to  distinguish  themselves  from  lower 
status ones. Bodily posture, where one sits and how one addresses others in public meetings 
are  manners  of  displaying  one’s  rank.  Typically,  although  not  specific  to  Haalpulaar 
society, lengthy traditional greetings are relevant to the social status of protagonists. One 
aspect is the repetition of the family name, which is called ‘yetode’ in Pulaar and literally 
means ‘the name that honours’. 
Ly (1966) described the attitude of the Haalpulaar aristocrats very precisely in his thesis. 
According to Ly, they are characterized by their sense of honour which does not exist in 
other classes. At the core of this principle, is the importance of always being in the position 
of giving and never asking. It is by giving and being publicly generous that the noble will 
be able to demonstrate his worthiness. When belonging to such families it is an unbearable 
shame  to  have  economic  difficulties.  There  are  great  pressures  to  display  generous 
behaviour. Maintaining a high social status is expensive as it means giving to their griots 
and many clients (former slaves, artisans...). The size of the clientele represents the power 
of the family. Along with the warm-glow effect of giving, griots directly raise the utility of 
the giver by advertising his generosity, which directly improves his reputation25. Important 
families  ought  to  give  to  their  former  slaves  and  bards  during  baptisms,  weddings  and 
religious events. 
In this traditional view, your birth determines your personality (see Wane 1969 who depicts 
each caste with a specific personal trait). It is said for instance that one should not trust an 
artisan  because  he  may  just  be  trying  to  seduce  oneself  in  order  to  receive  gifts.  Not 
knowing the whole genealogy of one’s family is also a problem: it is the case that former 
slaves  in  particular  have  lost  track  of  their  ancestors...  Hence  the  similarity  between  the 
Pulaar  word  for  ‘slave’,  ‘maccube’  and  ‘majjube’  meaning  ‘somebody  who  lost  his/her 
way’ (Wane, 1969). 
In  a  stratified  society  ruled  as  a  gerontocracy,  an  old  man  may  benefit  from  an 
advantageous position in local politics if and only if he belongs to a high ranked family. 
                                                 

24.  The  well-documented  historical  novel  Les  Peuls  by  Tierno  Monénembo  perfectly  illustrates  how 

mobile these social categories were over generations. 

25. See Azam (1995) for an interesting economic interpretation of such norm. 

 

11

Only a few families have a say in choosing the village leader, and even less have a chance 
to  become  one.  Hence,  the  family  name  becomes  a  valuable  symbolic  bequest  for  such 
important families. 
It  is  well  known  that  nowadays,  many  former  slaves,  or  bards  take  advantage  of  their 
position  too,  and  like  to  remind  their  former  masters  of  their  duty  to  provide  them  with 
gifts. Thus respecting this social pressure to give requires high income. Migration appears 
as a solution to finance these conspicuous expenses. 

The Baraka motive 

I was told many times during my investigations (both in France among the Diaspora, and in 
Senegal)  that  a  very  strong  motivation  for  remitting  is  to  earn  blessings  and  prayers  for 
felicity. Here religion and traditional beliefs interfere. 
Indeed  there  are  some  mystical  practices  in  Haalpulaar,  Wolof  and  Serer  traditions, 
consisting  in  calling  the  migrant  to  come  back  home  (Sylla  &  M'Baye  1991).  There  are 
legends26  about  migrants  coming  back  home  in  a  rush  and  losing  memory  of  how  this 
happened and then going insane. This is said to be adapted as a last resort, a retaliation on 
an unreliable son. 
Repeatedly  I  was  told  on  my  first  visit  in  Senegal  and  many  times  afterwards  also  by 
migrants in France, that it was very important to be near your dying parents as they will 
transmit the baraka of the whole dynasty through their last blessing27. Indeed a dying old 
man will call his beloved sons, and give them his final blessing: the ‘duhahu’ (in Pulaar) 
which gives baraka (or ‘barka’ in Pulaar). This Islamic word could roughly be translated as 
Allah’s blessing, and it has strong influence throughout the whole Islamic world28. It is a 
rather complicated concept as many anthropologists are still trying to properly define it. It 
is important to bear in mind that the final blessing is strongly linked to good luck, wealth, 
happiness,  health,  fertility,  and  social  success.  Being  rich  and  healthy  is  not  a  sufficient 
condition to possess baraka: Isn’t he old and abandoned today! Didn’t all his spouses go 
back to their family! He is so bad-tempered that only one of his grandsons agreed to stay 
with  him.  To  take  care  of  his  cattle  he  must  hire  shepherds  who  cheat  him  while  he  is 
unable to catch them. Where do you see baraka here?29 reports a villager talking about his 
neighbour who is the biggest cattle owner of the area in a Fula region of Cameroon. It can 
be acquired hereditarily through genealogical link to saints, or their contacts (see Schmitz 
2000), but also by a strict observance of the five pillars of Islam. It can be transmitted by 
blessings. Being old and a well known good Muslim puts oneself in a good position to have 
some.  In  my  different  stays  in  Northern  Senegal  I  witnessed  many  blessings  by  older 
people: when giving a ride to an old man, he would make me open my palms, murmured 
Islamic blessings, and blowing in my hands, then I would lay my palms upon my face30. 
Since  living  abroad  makes  it  rather  difficult  to  be  physically  near  your  dying  parents, 
                                                 

26. I was told many similar stories during my stay in the region of my survey. 
27. The importance of the parent's last blessing is not specific to Islam. It is mentionned in many parts of 
the Bible, and particularly in the Genesis. Think of Jacob's story: he valued so much his father's blessing that 
he managed to get blessed instead of his brother Esaü. 

28. And beyond, as it can be linked to the Christian word grace or the Jewish word berakhot, or also the 

Polynesian manna, although these related words are comparable they are not completely similar to baraka. 

29. Dognin (1990), my translation. 
30.This seems quite related to a local Sufi practice, detailed in Schmitz (2000). 

 

12

sending money appears as one practical alternative. Of course, the value of this baraka in 
the eyes of the migrant strongly depends on the notability of his patriarch and consequently 
on the status of the family. Obviously belonging to a prestigious family yields considerable 
returns  in  terms  of  prospects  for  marriage  and  political  position  in  the  village.  While  on 
migration, he could also benefit from the status of the family to rely on migrants from the 
same village. Besides, migrants from the same village usually live in neighbouring rooms 
in workers’ hostels (‘foyers de travailleurs’) reconstituting the village society. It has been 
repeatedly  suggested  that  this  is  a  way  of  reproducing  hierarchic  village  society  (for 
instance see Ba 1996: 207). As this is the anthropological aspect of my research, I will try 
to translate it into testable empirical evidence from the survey data I collected in the area. 

THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK 

Aware that it may not be the only mechanism at work, I will emphasize here the role of 
social status. Let us consider a patriarchal stratified society. Within the family the patriarch 
is the decision-maker. At the village level, there are two groups of families: the nobles and 
the others (non-nobles). Only the patriarchs from noble families can accede to influential 
positions.  To  deserve  their  advantageous  dominant  position,  the  nobles  must  pay  non-
nobles substantial gifts in monetary terms. The non-nobles who benefit from these transfers 
must in return renounce basic human rights: not choose a spouse among the nobles, give up 
their political ambitions, and admit the superiority of the nobles in community decision-
making. 
There is an implicit family contract between the patriarch and his adult sons. The patriarch 
sends his most promising sons on migration, expecting them to remit. The motivation of 
migrant sons is to obtain the father’s position on their return. 
In this view, remittances should be observed for high ranked migrants only. The migration 
of the lower status migrants relates to other motivations: trading monetary gifts for social 
mobility.  They  will  loosen  ties  with  their  community,  and  make  their  new  life  abroad, 
taking advantage of the anonymity of city life. 
Let us now turn to the data collected to test this scenario. 

DATA 

The Survey31

Of course, the link between the migrant and his relatives who stayed behind is central to 
understanding remittance behaviour. This is not an issue in my study, since I focused on the 
case of sons remitting to their ageing father. So, in the survey sample, all migrants have in 
common that their father is alive and lives in the village. Hence, remittances are interpreted 
as old-age support from the migrant sons. 
The  survey  was  conducted  just  before  the  rainy  season  from  April  to  June  2004,  when 
weather conditions are particularly tough. It is a time of drought and food scarcity as the 
granaries are empty. The good thing is that since peasants are preparing the fields for the 
rain cultivations, all members of the household who are away, but within reach, come back 
to give a hand. 
The survey covers 149 patriarchs over 6 villages randomly chosen around Matam32. Three 
                                                 

31. I must thank Ousmane Ba, Moussa Ly, Abou Sow, Abou Thiam and Hamath Thiam for doing a great 

job in data collection, as well as providing useful assistance in the survey design. 

32. Diery villages are: Thiambe, Galoyabe Toucouleur, Hombo. Walo villages are: Bow, Thiemping and 

 

 

13

are located by the Senegal river, in the so-called walo region, the other three are located 
approximately 10 km away from the river, in the diery region, one of them being right by 
the  highway  (the  others  being  4km  away  on  a  dirt  track).  Walo  villages  are  isolated  (at 
least) 3 months a year during the rainy season as roads become unfit for vehicles, which 
can only be reached by pirogues (2-3 hour instead of 20 minute ride during the dry season). 
Diery villagers do not own irrigated lands which are located near the river, but some noble 
families do own ‘walo’ lands by the river. 
It is an exhaustive survey, as all the men of the selected villages who met chosen criteria 
were  selected.  The  criteria  are  that  they  must  be  born  before  1939,  and  that  their  eldest 
living son should have been born before 1979. Information was gathered at 3 levels: 

•  The patriarch level: Information on both his social status and his living conditions 
were  gathered.  To  measure  social  status  I  gathered  information  on  the  family 
background such as which caste it belongs to, its tenure in the village, the political 
and religious role played by the patriarch and his father. Then much emphasis was 
put on where the patriarch gets support from, but also on his wealth (housing, fields, 
cattle,  belongings...),  health,  nutrition,  education,  past  migrations  and  economic 
activities. 

•  The  household  level:  I  define  a  household  as  a  unit  of  consumption  and  income 
sharing (sometimes several households can coreside in the same compound), which 
can be made of several nuclear family units33. I collected very precise family links 
between  household  members,  and  some  basic  information  on  each  one,  such  as: 
education level, economic activity, sources of revenue... 

•  Finally, information on each child has been collected. Special attention was given to 
children living outside the household, for which I gathered indirect information with 
spouses, mother, siblings, or the father. The main focus was on remittances sent by 
migrant sons and their old father, and the rest of the family. Information on news 
and visits given to the family were also collected. 

I put much effort on making sure to have at hand the most precise and reliable information 
on the social status of the families. For double-checking purposes, the status of the family 
was gathered twice. First, I obtained the information directly by asking the patriarch, then 
indirectly, on a second round, asking informants (mainly the village chief). As it can be a 
very sensitive subject, the question was asked towards the end of the survey, in order to 
prevent the patriarch from being offended or upset, or even from refusing to be surveyed. 
The question was asked among a series of question on historical background of the family, 
to make it sound like the family ‘social origin’. For the same reasons, I dared to ask the 
village chief about the status of my surveyed families, on a second round in September, so 
that we had already got to know each other better. 

Descriptive Statistics 

A detailed table of descriptive statistics for the initial sample, the migrants and the remitters 
is shown in table A in the appendix. 
                                                                                                                                                     
Thially  Souballo.  All  villagers  and  especially  village  chiefs  must  be  gratefully  acknowledged  for  their 
cooperation and kind hospitality. I would also like to thank Ousmane Diouf, and Bocar Ba’s family in Matam 
for their logistic assistance and gracious hospitality. 

33. The Pulaar word is ‘foyre’ (plural: ‘poye’). 

 

14

Social composition of the sample 
A table of the caste composition of the different samples studied is displayed in table 2. 
Only  the  sons  of  the  patriarchs  above  16  years  old  were  considered  as  potential  old-age 
support  providers.  There  are  470  adult  sons  in  the  initial  sample.  45%  are  on  migration. 
Among the migrants, 62% regularly remit. It is noteworthy that only 66% of the migrants 
belong to ‘free-born’ families, whereas they represent 71% of the remitters. 
Migrants’ destinations  
The  destination  distribution  is  very  similar  to  previous  studies  of  Haalpulaar  migration: 
mainly domestic, the international migration is mainly African, and very few have left the 
continent. 
44% of all migrations are domestic migrations, or migrations to the neighbouring countries, 
i.e.  Mauritania,  Mali,  Gambia  and  Guinea.  Dakar  concentrates  77%  of  these  ‘domestic’ 
(Senegal or neighbouring countries) destinations. However, the capital city is often just a 
temporary stop on the way to further destinations. 
38%  of  migrants  went  to  another  African  country.  Most  of  African  migration  (73%)  is 
directed towards Central Africa: Gabon, Congo, and Cameroon. There is a long tradition of 
Senegal  River  Valley  migration  in  this  area.  There  are  accounts  of  ‘diamantaires’  who 
made  quite  a  good  fortune  in  these  countries34.  Côte  d’Ivoire  has  also  been  a  frequent 
choice of destination, but since 2000 because of the political instability, and xenophobic 
practices many have fled. 
In the end, only 18% of the migrants left the African continent (they represent 39 migrants): 
not surprisingly, most went to France (26 migrants). The USA is the second destination (9 
migrants), then a few migrants are in Spain or Italy (5). The US is an increasingly attractive 
destination, but this is still a recent phenomenon, so that the network is still weak, not to 
mention the cost of migration. During my field investigations, I met returning or visiting 
migrants  from  Germany  and  Denmark,  and  also  surprisingly  distant  destinations  like 
Australia  and  even  China!  Even  if  this  is  not  statistically  significant,  it  indicates  that 
diversification of destinations is used to circumvent tough migration policies. 
It  is  important  to  bear  in  mind  that  information  about  migrants  is  only  second  hand.  I 
assumed the best information I could collect about them would be from the mother or the 
wife of the migrant. I also asked the brothers and the father if necessary. 

Empirical Strategy 

Since only those who have migrated can make transfers, I had to use a two-step Heckman 
model (generalized for logit models) to take into account the selection bias. The question is 
: Do the ones with a higher probability of migrating have a higher or lower probability of 
remitting? As pointed out in the next section, we do not find such effects. 
Furthermore,  since  I  do  have  migrants  from  the  same  families  (up  to  7  brothers!),  I 
incorporated  the  correlation  inside  the  family using  a  robust  estimator  of  standard  errors 
with family clusters. 
The  descriptive  statistics  evidence  found  in  the  previous  section  need  to  be  checked  ‘all 
things being equal’. Hence, let us now turn to the regression results. They are displayed in 
table 3. 
                                                 

34. Starting in the mid-fifties in Sierra-Leone, near both sides of the Congo rivers by the sixties, they have 

reached Angola and Zambia, striving to avoid being expelled, Bredeloup (1994). 

 

15

When computing the probability of migrating, in line with Gubert (2000), I decided to take 
a snapshot of the family when each son migrated. I computed his age and the age of the 
patriarch when he left the household (‘age when migrating’, ‘age of the patriarch when son 
migrated’), along with the number of brothers already on migration at that time. In the case 
of the non-migrant, the age is left unchanged, so the ‘age when migrating’ corresponds in 
reality to the age at the time of the survey. The same holds for the age of the patriarch. 
Also, the ‘number of brothers already on migration’ simply corresponds to the total number 
of brothers in migration at the time of the survey. 

 

16

RESULTS 

In reality I find that both decisions to migrate and then to remit are not correlated: rho is not 
significantly different from 0. Therefore, these two regressions can be studied separately. 
For both regressions, usual results in line with previous studies are found along with other 
different findings. Results are displayed in Table 3. 

Probability of migrating 

Overall this model correctly predicts 71% of migrating behaviour. Nevertheless only 53% 
of actual migrants are properly predicted by this model. This highlights the fact that there 
are in reality many different motives for migrating, which is not in contradiction with the 
theoretical framework developed here. 
The variables that appeared not to be significant are notably: years of formal schooling of 
the migrant35, and the number of migrating brothers. The fact that the number of years in 
formal schooling is not significant is relevant to the fact that migrants do not need to hold 
literacy  skills  for  the  job  they  will  find  in  migration.  One  must  keep  in  mind  that  most 
migrants  work  in  the  informal  sector,  in  Dakar  and  Africa,  and  in  unskilled  jobs  in 
industrialized  countries  (mainly  in  the  hotel  or  catering  trades).  As  for  the  number  of 
migrating brothers, there are two opposite effects: a network and a saturation effect. Having 
a brother can facilitate migration: older brothers can finance their cadets, creating shifts of 
migrants36. On the other hand, when there are already migrants in the family, the patriarch 
may require other sons to stay to help him manage the household. Here it seems that both 
effects are neutralized. 
Turning  to  significant  variables,  the  fact  that  his  father  spent  many  years  on  migration 
increases the chance of the son migrating. There are here 2 intertwined positive effects: a 
wealth  and  a  network  effect.  All  migrations  are  costly  but  especially  for  distant 
destinations: fares, bribing to get documents, or to get across the border safely. It usually 
represents far more than what a basic rural household can afford. Then there are some high 
costs of accommodation: even in Dakar renting a room has become very expensive.... Of 
patriarchs who have been on migration around 55% receive a pension. However the ones 
who did not get a formal job usually managed to invest in productive activities financing 
their  own  sons’  migration  and  settlement.  Consequently,  it  appears  that  sons  of 
economically better-off families have a higher chance to migrate. Along with this wealth 
effect,  there  is  a  network  effect:  fathers  who  have  been  on  migration  have  been  able  to 
build networks in their destination and acquire accordingly easy entry on some job markets. 
The best illustration of this is that many first migrants of this area started working in the 
hotel trade in Dakar, many at the airport, then in France. Or even working as boy or cook 
for the French colonialists who then took them to France to work for them. This result is in 
line with other studies. 
Another interesting result is that sons that have received thorough Koranic studies have a 
higher chance of migrating. Indeed in the area most children, both boys and girls, attend at 
least  the  first  years  of  Koranic  schools  in  order  to  be  able  to  recite  basic  prayers.  As 

                                                 

35. I had to drop this variable from the regression in order to keep the ‘Koranic studies’ variable: indeed, 

only those without formal schooling may be enrolled in Koranic studies. 

36. In French this is called ‘noria’ (see Ba 1996: 30). This can no longer hold for destinations which have 

become very difficult to reach such as Europe... 

 

17

mentioned before this central result illustrates the idea that Koranic schools are above all 
aimed  at  transmitting  moral  values  and  among  them  the  respect  for  one’s  own  parents. 
However when going up the levels of Koranic schools the two school systems enter into 
competition,  as  they  are  rarely  compatible.  Parents,  traditionally  fathers,  have  to  decide 
which education to give to their sons (girls usually do not pursue Koranic studies for many 
years).  This  must  be  put  in  parallel  with  the  fact  that  having  formal  schooling  does  not 
improve the probability of migrating. Here a father who wants to send his son on migration 
will prefer to previously send him to a Koranic school instead of the official Francophone 
school system. 
Finally, the age of the father has a negative but decreasing effect, whereas the age of the 
son when migrating has no effect. 
Last  but  not  least,  sons  of  families  belonging  to  the  higher  castes  are  less  inclined  to 
migrate.  This  result  contradicts  Gubert’s  (2000)  findings  among  Soninke:  she  found  that 
only  aristocrats  migrate.  It  is  necessary  to  turn  to  migrants  remitting  behaviour  to 
understand  if  migrants  from  high  and  low  status  have  the  same  behaviour  once  in 
migration. 

Probability of remitting 

Among the migrants, I turn now to their probability of remitting. This model has a good 
predictive power as overall nearly 80% of migrants are properly predicted to remit or not. 
First, the age of the migrant appears not to be significant for his remitting behaviour. The 
size  of  the  household,  as  well  as  the  presence  of  his  own  children  or  spouse  in  the 
household also has no impact on his probability of remitting. 
Some  expected  ‘wealth  effects’  are  found:  data  on  the  migrant’s  earnings  were  not 
available,  but  there  are  some  proxies.  The  time  spent  on  migration  appeared  not  to  be 
significant at first, but I re-coded it into a dummy variable for migrants who have been on 
migration  for  over  3  years.  This  dummy  has  a  positive  impact  on  the  probability  of 
remitting, which is significant at the 10% level. This reflects the idea that it usually takes 
time  for  a  migrant  to  obtain  a  secure  earning,  i.e.  regular  wages.  Similarly,  living  in  a 
developed country positively affects his probability of remitting. This is obviously linked to 
the higher earnings available there: he earns more than his own living expenses and can 
accordingly send back a part of his earning. 
Surprisingly, no monitoring effects are found here: having brothers living in the same place 
of migration has no significant effect on his remitting behaviour. 
I found that migrants who had followed religious schooling have a higher probability of 
remitting.  Hence  the  idea  of  migrant’s  selection  by  the  patriarch.  He  will  favour  the 
migration  of  the  son  who  has  received  a  traditional  Koranic  education,  being  more 
confident about his loyalty. It is consistent with the preference shaping theory I mentioned 
earlier. 
There is a trigger effect from his brothers remitting behaviour too: the more brothers who 
are remitting there are, the more likely it is that he will remit, and the more who are not 
remitting, the more likely it is that he will not remit. 
Finally, central to the main point of this article: belonging to a politically powerful family 
in the village makes the migrant more likely to remit. Indeed, this status dummy variable is 
strongly significant at a 5% level (p-value of 3.1%). Here what seems to be central is the 
fact  that  the  patriarch  plays  a  significant  role  in  the  village  belonging  to  the  circle  of 
influential notables. Indeed, belonging to the free born category is not precise enough, as 

 

18

this  is  a  heterogeneous  category.  For  instance,  newly  arrived  free  born  families  may  not 
have regained a dominant position in the village37. On the contrary, a few families from the 
artisans or former slaves groups may have acquired a political position being linked with a 
very  prestigious  family.  One  could  suggest  that  those  families  are  also  more  likely  to 
possess the most valuable lands, and as a result this is in line with Hoddinott (1994). Indeed 
having  received  valuable  land  by  bequest  has  no  significant  effect  of  the  probability  of 
remitting. Therefore it seems that the effect here of the political status variable is mainly a 
social status effect and not a wealth effect. 

Other Supportive Evidence 

The  econometric  evidence  may  seem  a  little  weak  as  the  survey  does  not  cover  a  huge 
sample of migrants: there are only 213 migrants in the sample. Unfortunately the lack of 
social status variables in other larger statistical surveys makes it impossible to compare this 
result  with  other  studies  so  far.  As  a  complement  to  the  empirical  evidence  some  other 
qualitative pieces of evidence which confirm the hypothesis made in this paper are listed 
here. 
To gain respectability in the village the most efficient way is to contribute to the building of 
a  mosque.  There  are  several  anecdotes  I  heard  during  my  stay  in  the  valley,  about  the 
boycott of mosques built by migrant slaves. The Imam who is necessarily a noble, simply 
refused to lead the prayers... I heard a similar story about a well built by a successful slave 
that the nobles boycotted, opting for the more distant well. These anecdotes show that it is 
rather inefficient for a slave to invest in order to raise his respectability in the village: he 
will  always  be  considered  as  a  slave  and  accordingly  will  be  reminded  to  keep  his  low-
profile rank. The only way to get rid of these social stigmas is to migrate. In anonymous 
cities or foreign countries, he will more easily merge into society and be free in his acts. 
It is noticeable that during my repeated visits at different workers hostels, I met very few 
descendants  of  slaves  or  artisans38.  This  is  consistent,  with  reported  cases  of  continuing 
discrimination against slaves on migration. The pattern is that slaves are excluded from any 
decision-making  position  in  the  migrant’s  association.  Ba  (1996)  reports  such  a  case  in 
Cameroon (Ba 1996: 238). 
In Dakar, many people with Haalpulaaren names who do not speak Pulaar happen to be of 
slave or artisan origins. They seem to be the product of this melting pot. 
In many previous studies on migration among the Haalpulaaren it has been mentioned that 
the  desire  to  escape  from  rigid  social  constraints  were  among  the  main  motives  for 
migration. As they usually refer to the position of younger brothers willing to escape the 
tyranny of older brothers (see Platteau 2000), it could easily be extended to lower status 
migrants. The study of Delaunay (1984) goes in the same direction as my results. He finds 
that  any  type  of  caste  can  be  found  among  the  migrants  from  the  Senegal  valley,  but 
recognizes that the former slaves are more likely to settle definitively, whereas the nobles 
go on temporary migration returning to the village, and sending remittances. 

CONCLUDING REMARKS 

                                                 

37. It is the case of many Mauritanian refugees (from the 1989 unrest) who despite being Fulbe have rarely 

gained a position as notable in their new Senegalese settlement. 

38. except the descendants of slaves of the village chief's family, which would tend to prove that former 

slaves of important families have some kind of respectability too. 

 

19

These empirical findings suggest that migration is available to any social category, but for 
different aims: it can either be seen as an individual decision to escape from a poor social 
position with dire prospects in the village or, conversely, as a family decision to maintain 
its dominant local position. As a consequence, it is obvious that the first type of migrants 
will not be interested in investing in the development of the village but will benefit from the 
urban melting pot to get rid of their social stigmas. The good side of this is that they are 
factors  of  change  as  they  move  from  a  network-based  to  a  modern  market  economy.  In 
order  to  prevent  rural  exodus  and  urban  concentrations,  an  efficient  policy  would  be  to 
invest in intensive consciousness-raising campaigns to get rid of the obsolete caste system. 
This will probably take time and be hard to implement as I found out that this was still a 
highly taboo subject in contemporary Senegal. 
Central  to  political  debates  in  France,  republican  values  of  racial  integration  and 
assimilation  may  differently  appeal  to  both  types  of  migrants  previously  described. 
France’s model of integration aims to assimilate immigrants by instilling French cultural 
values.  As  a  result,  keeping  strong  ties  with  the  country  of  origin  is  not  well  received. 
Accordingly, any attempt to assimilate the migrants of noble origins will fail. Indeed, they 
see themselves as temporarily migrant and have sound plans to return to the village. When 
returning  they  will  genuinely  keep  silent  their  shameful  subordinate  occupations39  while 
abroad  and  turn  into  powerful  notables.  Alternatively,  the  migrants  from  lower  social 
categories will display strong motivations to fit in. 
The aim of this study was primarily to draw attention to the local institutions when trying to 
understand migration in a non-western environment. Economists and econometricians too 
often  draw  conclusions  from  surveys  that  were  lacking  the  social  context.  As  this  was  a 
limited study, it would be interesting to pursue on a broader range. The recent World Bank 
book Culture and Public Action (Rao & Walton, 2006) sends a good signal that things are 
changing and that more and more cooperation between economists and anthropologists will 
be expected in the near future. 

Ambec,  Stefan.  2000.  “Income  Sharing  Within  Extended  Families  as  a  Social  Norm.” 

REFERENCES 

Mimeo, University of Salerno. 

Développement 4: 3-19. 

Azam,  Jean-Paul.  1995.  “L’Etat  Autogéré 

  en  Afrique.”  Revue  d'Economie  du 

Azam,  Jean-Paul  and  Flore  Gubert.  2006.  “Migrants’  Remittances  and  the  Household  in 
Africa: A Review of Evidence.” Journal of African Economies 15 (AERC sup. 2): 426-
62. 

Ba, Cheikh Oumar. 1996. “Dynamiques Migratoires et Changements Sociaux au Sein des 
Relations de Genre et des Rapports Jeunes/Vieux des Originaires de la Moyenne Vallée 
du Fleuve Sénégal.” PhD thesis, Université Cheikh Anta Diop de Dakar. 

Becker,  Gary  S.  1993.  “Nobel  Lecture:  The  Economic  Way  of  Looking  at  Behavior.” 

Journal of Political Economy 101: 385-409. 

----. 1996. Accounting for Tastes. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
                                                 

39. I can witness that it is absolutely taboo to ask a visiting migrant about his job in the host country (or in 
the capital city). As one might guess such work was not prestigious, it is generally accepted to keep it silent... 
or to tell it only to a total foreigner away from other villagers! 

 

20

Bernheim, B. Douglas, Andrei Schleifer and Lawrence H. Summers. 1985. “The Strategic 

Bequest Motive.” Journal of Political Economy 93:1045-76. 

Bernheim, B. Douglas and Oded Stark. 1988. “Altruism within the Family Reconsidered: 

Do nice guys finish last?” American Economic Review 78: 1034-45. 

Bredeloup,  Sylvie.  1994.  “L’Aventure  Contemporaine  des  Diamantaires  Sénégalais” 

Politique Africaine 56: 77-93. 

Cigno, Alessandro. 1993. “Inter-generational Transfers without Altruism: Family, Market 

and State.” European Journal of Political Economy 9: 505-18. 

Coate,  Stephen  and  Martin  Ravallion.  1993.  “Reciprocity  without  Commitment: 
Characterization  and  Performance  of  Informal  Insurance  Arrangements.”  Journal  of 
Development Economics 40: 1-24. 

Cox, Donald. 1987. “Motives for Private Income Transfers.” Journal of Political Economy 

95: 508-46. 

Delaunay, Daniel. 1984. De la Captivité  à  l'Exil : Histoire et Démographie des Migrations 

Paysannes dans la Moyenne Vallée du Fleuve Sénégal. Paris: ORSTOM. 

Dognin, René. 1990. “L’Arbre Peul.” Cahiers des Sciences Humaines, 26 (4): 505-29. 
Ferreira,  Monica.  2005.  “Elder  Abuse  in  Africa:  What  Policy  and  Legal  Provisions  Are 

There to Address the Violence?” Journal of Elder Abuse & Neglect 16, 2: 17-32. 

Gubert, Flore. 2000. “Migration et Gestion Collective des Risques. L'exemple de la région 

de Kayes.” PhD thesis, Université de Clermont-Ferrand I. 

Guttman,  Joel  M.  2001.  “Self-Enforcing  Reciprocity  Norms  and  Inter-generational 

Transfers: Theory and Evidence.” Journal of Public Economics 81:117-51. 

Hoddinott,  John.  1992.  “Rotten  Kids  or  Manipulative  Parents:  Are  Children  Old-Age 
Security in Western Kenya?” Economic Development and Cultural Change 40:545-65. 
Klein,  Martin  A.  2005.  “The  Concept  of  Honour  and  the  Persistence  of  Servility  in  the 

Western Soudan.” Cahiers d'Etudes Africaines 45, 179-180: 831-51. 

Laferrère,  Anne  and  François-Charles  Wolff.  2006.  “Microeconomic  Model  of  Family 
Transfers.” In Handbook of the Economics of Giving, Altruism and Reciprocity, Vol. 2, 
edited by S.C. Kolm and J.M. Ythier, ch11. Amsterdam: North-Holland/Elsevier.  

Luke, Nancy and Kaivan Munshi. 2005. “Women as Agents of Change: Female Income, 
Social Affiliation and Household Decisions in South India.” Mimeo, Brown University. 
Ly,  Boubakar.  1966.  “Honneur  et  Valeurs  Morales  dans  les  Sociétés  Ouolofs  et  Pular.” 

PhD thesis, Université de Paris. 

Miguel, Edward. 2003. “Poverty and Witch Killing.” BREAD Working Paper 41. 
Mission  d’Aménagement  du  Fleuve  Sénégal  (MAS).  1959. Les  Hommes  du  Fouta  Toro. 

Saint-Louis: MAS. 

Monenembo, Tierno. 2005. Les Peuls. Paris: Seuil. 
Nugent,  Jeffrey  B.  1985.  “The  Old-Age  Security  Motive  for  Fertility.”  Population  and 

Petit,  Agathe.  2002.  “L’Ultime  Retour  des  Gens  du  Fleuve  Sénégal.”  Hommes  et 

Development Review 11, 1: .75-97. 

Migrations 1236: 44-52. 

Platteau,  Jean-Philippe.  2000.  Institutions,  Social  Norms  and  Economic  Development. 

Amsterdam: Harwood Academic Publisher. 

Rao,  Vijayendra  and  Michael  Walton,  eds.  2006.  Culture  and  Public  Action.  Stanford: 

Stanford University Press. 

Rosenzweig,  Mark  R.  1988.  “Risk,  Implicit  Contracts  and  the  Family  in  Rural  Areas  of 

 

21

Low-Income Countries.” Economic Journal 98, 393: 1148-70. 

Rosenzweig,  Mark  R.  and  Oded  Stark.  1989.  “Consumption  Smoothing,  Migration  and 

Marriage: Evidence from rural India.” Journal of Political Economy 97: 905-26. 

Samuelson, Paul A. 1958. “An Exact Consumption Loan Model of Interest with or without 

the Social Contrivance of Money.” Journal of Political Economy 66: 467-82. 

Schmitz, Jean. 2000. “Le Souffle de la Parenté. Mariage et Transmission de la Baraka chez 

les Clercs Musulmans de la Vallée du Sénégal.” L'Homme 154-155: 241-77. 

Stark, Oded. 1991. The Migration of Labor. Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 
----. 1995. Altruism and Beyond: An Economic Analysis of Transfers and Exchanges within 

Families and Groups. Cambridge University Press. 

Sylla, Omar and Mor Mbaye. 1991. “Psychopathologie et Migration: un Cas de Wootal.” 

Psychopathologie Africaine XXIII 3: 353-63. 

Wane,  Yaya.  1969.  Les  Toucouleurs  du  Fouta  Toro:  Stratification  Sociale  et  Structure 

Familiale. Dakar: IFAN. 

World  Bank.  2005.  Global  Development  Finance:  Mobilizing  Finance  and  Managing 

Vulnerability. Washington: World Bank Publications. 

World  Health  Organization  (WHO).  2002.  The  Toronto  Declaration  on  the  Global 

Prevention of Elder Abuse. Geneva: WHO. 

 

22

The Haalpulaar complex caste system (translated from Wane 1969: 33). 

TABLE 1 

Strata (class) 

Rimbe ardiibe 

(free) 

Rimbe huunybe 

(courtiers) 

Fecciram golle 

(artisans) 

 

 

Social 
Category 
(order) 

Rimbe 

Nyeenybe 

Jyaabe 

Caste 

Occupation and Title 

Toorobbe Lawakoobe or fileteebe   Temporal power 

 

Sebbe

Jaawambe
Subalbe

Jangube or ardiibe diine  Spiritual power : ceerno 
Miiskineebe 
Worgankoobe 
Kolyaabe 
Mbonaabe 
Awgalnaabe 
Helgalagel, etc. 

Free men, farmers: demoowo 
Former monarchs: farba ceddo 
Koly’s soldiers : jagaraf 

Local variants of kolyaabe 

Courtiers and advisers: sooma 
Fishermen: jaaltaabe 

Maabube sanyoobe 

Weavers: jarno 

Wayilbe

Sakkeebe

Lawbe 

Baleebe 
Sayakoobe 
Alawbe 
Wodeebe or garankoobe  Cobblers 
Laade 
Worworbe (bobi) 

Blacksmiths: farba baylo 
Jewelers: farba baylo 
Shoemakers: foosiri 

Naalankoobe 
(entertainers) or 

Buurnaabe
Wambaabe
Maabube suudu Paate 
Maabube jaawambe
Lawbe gumbala (kontimpaaji) 
Awlube
Soottiibe (freed slaves) Maccube
Halfaabe (dependants)  Maccube

nyaagotoobe (praise 

singers) 

Pirogue builders: kalmbaan 
Kitchen tools’ makers: maalaw 
Potters and ceramicists 
Traditional guitar players 

Singers 

Griots genealogists : farba gawlo 
Free but servile 
Slaves and servants: jagodiin 

 

23

Caste composition of samples of interest. 
 

Patriarchs (%) 

(N=147) 

TABLE 2 

Categories 

Free-born 
Artisans 
Slaves 

 

All Sons (%) 

(N=470) 

Migrants (%) 

(N=213) 

Remitters (%) 

(N=133) 

70.1 
12.9 
17.0 

72.1 
11.7 
16.2 

65.7 
16.9 
17.4 

70.7 
15.8 
13.5 

 

24

Two-stage probit regression: probability of migrating and then of remitting. 
 

TABLE 3 

Est. 

Robust std. 
Errors (1)

Prob. Values 
 

 
 

Probability of migrating (N=470) 
Intercept 
Age when migrating 
Koranic studies 
Nb. of brothers already on migration 
Age of the patriarch when son migrated 
(age of the patriarch)² 
Nb. of years the father went on migration 
Family of higher casts 
Village dummies 
Probability of remitting (N=213: migrants) 
Intercept 
Ages 
Koranic studies 
On migration for over 3 years 
Brothers in region of migration 
Residing in a developed country 
Spouse left in the household 
Nb. of brothers remitting 
Nb. of brothers who don't remit 
Age of the patriarch 
Local power of the lineage 
Valuable agric land on bequest 
Number of dependants for patriarch 
Village dummies 
Rho 
95% conf. Interval 
 
(1) adjusted for family clusters. 
***1%, **5%, *10% significativity levels. 

 

 

40.358 
-0.001 
0.420 
-0.065 
-1.070 
0.007 
0.024 
-0.459 
Non sig. 

 

-3.525 
-0.002 
0.435 
0.510 
0.270 
1.311 
0.389 
0.140 
-0.365 
0.046 
0.493 
-0.318 
0.011 
Non sig. 
-0.554 

 

 

9.843 
0.010 
0.177 
0.061 
0.270 
0.002 
0.008 
0.216 

 
 

1.532 
0.017 
0.251 
0.278 
0.263 
0.413 
0.246 
0.085 
0.120 
0.021 
0.228 
0.250 
0.034 

 
 

-0.967 

 

 

.000  *** 
.955 
.018  ** 
.287 
.000  *** 
.000  *** 
.003  *** 
.034  ** 

 
 

 
 

.021  ** 
.926 
 
.084  * 
.066  * 
.306 
 
.002  *** 
.113 
 
.098  * 
.002  *** 
.029  ** 
.031  ** 
.203 
.757 
 
 
.664 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

25

Descriptive statistics for the initial sample, the migrants and the remitters. 
 
 

Std. Min. Max. Mean 

 

 

 

Initial Adult Sons (N=470) 
Mean 
45% 

 

 

TABLE A 

 

 

On migration 
Remitting 
Age
Age when leaving the household 
Birth order 
Koranic studies
 
Formal schooling
Years of (formal) schooling 
Years on migration 
In migration for over 3 years 
Residing in a developed country 
Spouse (of the son) left in the household 
Nb. of brothers already on migration 
Nb. of brothers remitting 
Nb. of brothers who don't remit 
Age of the patriarch 
Age of the patriarch when son migrated 
Number of dependants of the patriarch 
Family in region of migration 
Nb. of years the father went on migration 
Family of higher castes 
Local power of the lineage 
Valuable agric land on bequest 
Thiempeng
Bow 
 
Thially
Galoyabe
 
Hombo
 
Thiambe

 

 

 

N
O
S

 

Y
L
I
M
A
F

 
S
E
G
A
L
L
I
V

 

 

30.8 
28.1 
2.6 
53%
 
36%
 
2.4 
 
 
 
 
1.0 
 
 

73.9 
71.2 
7.6 
 

10.6 
72% 
42% 
58% 
31% 
18% 
5%
 
 
14%
 
16%
16%
 

Migrants (N=213) 

Remitters (N=133) 

Std. Min. Max. Mean 

 

 

 

Std. Min. Max.

 

 

 

 

 
 

62% 
33.2
 
27.4 
2.4 
58%
33%
2.4 
6.1 
54% 
18% 
41% 
1.0 
1.3 
0.8 
74.9 
69.1 
7.4 
33% 
13.9 
66% 
46% 
61% 
28%
 
15%
 
5%
 
 
15%
 
18%
18%
 

 
 
 
8.1
8.3 
1.5 
 
 
4.2 
5.7 
 
 
 
1.3 
1.5 
1.0 
6.4 
8.4 
3.7 
 

14.2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
17
3 
1 
 
 
0 
0 
 
 
 
0 
0 
0 
66 
42 
2 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
61
50 
8 
 
 
17 
25 
 
 
 
6 
6 
4 
91 
89 
16 
 
47 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

34.5 
27.8 
2.3 
65%
27%
1.8 
6.9 
66% 
26% 
52% 
1.0 
1.6 
0.4 
76.2 
69.5 
7.0 
32% 
15.0 
71% 
56% 
56% 
 
31%
15%
 
 
3%
 
16%
 
18%
 
17%

 
 
 
8.5
8.3 
1.6 
 
 
3.6 
5.8 
 
 
 
1.4 
1.7 
0.9 
6.3 
8.4 
3.7 
 

15.1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
18
 
11 
1 
 
 
0 
0 
 
 
 
0 
0 
0 
66 
42 
2 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
61
50 
8 
 
 
13 
25 
 
 
 
5 
5 
4 
91 
89 
16 
 
47 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
8.4 
8.3 
1.6 
 
 
3.7 
 
 
 
 
1.3 
 
 
6.3 
7.5 
3.8 
 

12.9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
17
3 
1 
 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
0 
 
 
66 
42 
2 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
61
51 
8 
 
 
17 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
91 
89 
17 
 
47 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

26

 

 

27

