CAROLINE M. MELLY
Smith College

Titanic tales of missing men:
Reconﬁgurations of national identity and gendered
presence in Dakar, Senegal

A B S T R A C T
Amidst a “crisis” of clandestine migration in West
Africa, tales about the exploits of “missing men”
circulated through Dakar, Senegal. In this article, I
explore how these myths enabled debate about the
changing parameters of male social visibility, nation
building, and social success in the city at the same
time that they paradoxically recast as spectacularly
present men who had failed to achieve by these
standards. I argue that both public discourse about
and scholarly analysis of the impact of transnational
migration on those left behind recenter the
activities of some men, rendering invisible other
modes of being and belonging. [gender, clandestine
migration, neoliberalism, presence, postcolonial
nation, myth, public]

I n the spring of 2007 in Dakar, Senegal, there emerged a fantastic

tale about an extraordinary pirogue, a type of wooden ﬁshing canoe
that is ubiquitous on the shores of West Africa. Although I would
encounter the story in various guises over several weeks, it was
Ousseynou, a taxi driver and one of my most earnest informants,
who ﬁrst related the incredible news: A pirogue named Titanique (Titanic)
had suddenly vanished two weeks earlier from the shores of Ruﬁsque.1 It
was the largest pirogue anyone had ever seen, was loaded with plentiful
food and water and cooking gas, and had four motors, a sophisticated GPS
system, and room for 120 passengers. Ousseynou proudly claimed to have
caught a glimpse of the vessel as it was being hewn from a single, massive
tree trunk hauled from southern Senegal. An ambitious “entrepreneur”
had spent at least $16,000 (7,800,000 FCFA) to construct the pirogue,
and hopeful clandestine migrants had individually “invested” (investir)
more than $1,200 to secure a spot in it—an amount that surely exceeded
Ousseynou’s yearly income. No one was certain where the vessel had
gone, but Ousseynou had heard rumors that the now-mythical Titanique
was en route to the Canary Islands, a key destination for clandestine
migrants from West Africa, or perhaps even to the United States. Wor-
ried mothers who had not seen their sons began to speculate that they
had boarded the famed pirogue before it had departed, and Ousseynou
too wondered whether a childhood friend of his had, in fact, become a
“candidat” (candidate or applicant), as hopeful clandestine migrants were
commonly called. Alarmed by my informant’s tale, I asked Ousseynou if
he knew the fate of the original Titanic, the doomed ship whose maiden
voyage had ended in catastrophe. Of course, he replied, everyone knew
that story well. The Titanic was the boat that had been built too big and
that had fallen into the ocean (tomber dans la mer) as it crossed the
Atlantic. In a tone at once ironic and utterly vacant, he added, “That’s
probably what happened to this Titanique too.” Ousseynou recounted
this tale as the two of us navigated the urban labyrinth of Dakar in
his ailing cab, so that I could snap photographs of the city’s public art
that warned against the perils of clandestine migration. I had just climbed

AMERICAN ETHNOLOGIST, Vol. 38, No. 2, pp. 361–376, ISSN 0094-0496, online
ISSN 1548-1425. C(cid:2) 2011 by the American Anthropological Association. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1548-1425.2011.01311.x

American Ethnologist

(cid:2) Volume 38 Number 2 May 2011

back into the taxicab after a brief stop at a particularly
evocative mural, one painted on a stark white wall with
graphic black strokes. (See Figure 1.) It depicted a violent
sea swallowing a pirogue and its passengers, and it bore a
stern admonition: “Wanting to leave does not give you the
right to sacriﬁce yourself.” As Ousseynou spoke, my mind
wandered to this mural and to the pervasive sense of loss
with which it grappled.

The Titanique tale and this spectacular mural were part
of a larger social landscape, one in which vanished pirogues
and missing men became public ﬁxations. In 2006 alone,
over 30,000 migrants were apprehended as they tried to seek
illicit passage by pirogue from West Africa to the Canary Is-
lands, an archipelago off the coast of Morocco that is under
Spanish jurisdiction (Willems 2008). Another 6,000 hopeful
migrants are estimated to have died en route, though many
ofﬁcials fear that the actual ﬁgure could be much higher.
These candidats hoped to be processed and sent to main-
land Spain, where they aimed to insert themselves into ex-
isting migrant networks and ﬁnd work. Though there were
reports of women and even children who joined the voy-
ages, the vast majority of these migrants were men (Mbodji
2008). Most were West African, and more than half were
of Senegalese nationality (Willems 2008).2 Unable to mi-
grate through legitimate channels, pirogue candidats were
nonetheless not the poorest of the poor, as they could af-
ford the steep “investments” required for participation in

the voyages. Dakar was a key point of departure for these
transnational clandestine ﬂows, and it was, in many ways,
the epicenter of loss. Bodies washed ashore along the city’s
beaches, daily newspapers offered updates and estimates
of fatalities and repatriations, and public service campaigns
aimed at deterring clandestine migration were sandwiched
between popular evening television dramas. My friends and
informants routinely scanned the city’s beaches, the sea’s
horizon, and daily newspaper headlines in frantic search
of any trace, any mention, any glimpse of these familiar
wooden ﬁshing canoes, dubbed “pirogues of hope and of
death” by one local journalist (Ndoye 2006). As politicians
and the media spoke of a deepening “crisis,” rumors spread
of unemployed sons and disenchanted fathers who had
suddenly and inexplicably disappeared. (See Figure 2.)

In this article, I focus my attention on three fantas-
tic myths of failed clandestine voyages that circulated be-
tween 2006 and 2007: Ousseynou’s tale of the doomed Ti-
tanique, which highlights the shifting parameters of success
and failure in contemporary Dakar; Souleymane’s account
of his own heroic survival, forced return, and ongoing
quest to become “big”; and A¨ıda and Yaye’s amusing
story of a migration scam that landed the naive candi-
dats back where they started. All three myths were re-
counted to me in 2007, and my interactions with the nar-
rators took place in a mix of French and Wolof. I use these
encounters to illustrate how contemporary pirogue tales

Figure 1. A street mural in urban Dakar depicts a sinking pirogue and bears the grim warning, “Wanting to leave does not give you the right to sacriﬁce
yourself.” (All photos by the author.)

362

Titanic tales of missing men (cid:2) American Ethnologist

Figure 2. A pirogue, worn by age and frequent use, now sits idle. Residents insisted that the pirogue would be sold for use as a vessel for clandestine
migration to the Canary Islands.

both provided critical commentary on and helped to rede-
ﬁne the contours of social success in contemporary Dakar.
In the sections that follow, I explore how the emergence
of this new genre of pirogue mythmaking coincided with
complex social and political transformations that rendered
men’s migration itineraries—considered for decades to be
a crucial avenue for realizing masculine adulthood, solidi-
fying brotherly networks, accumulating wealth, and staking
claim to social presence in Senegal—simultaneously more
unlikely and more urgent. Achieving urban visibility and
constructing the nation were thus reafﬁrmed as deeply gen-
dered exploits in which men’s movements produced social
consequence. Characterized in these tales as a risk-taking
entrepreneur who sought an alternative future, the ﬁgure
of the clandestine migrant was nonetheless described and
encountered with deep ambivalence. Through their stories,
urban residents evoked these migrants as missing, disap-
peared, vanished; in doing so, they drew public attention to
the predicament of urban presence and created space for
debate about the present—about economic changes, clan-
destine migration, and the challenges facing the nation (see
also Battaglia 1994).

Paradoxically,

these tales also enabled socially
marginalized men who could not migrate through le-
gitimate routes to achieve some degree of notoriety,
respect, and success for themselves, however ﬂeeting and
ambivalent, through their public status as missing men.

I borrow the term missing men from Evelyn Blackwood’s
(2005) study of matrifocal households and retool it to
consider the gendered assumptions that undergird popular
and scholarly reﬂections on Senegalese migration and
nation building. I argue below that it was through repeti-
tion and reiteration of tales of failed migration attempts
that men became spectacularly present as national ad-
venturers, risk-taking entrepreneurs, and devoted family
men who were willing to sacriﬁce themselves for others.
In contrast to men, women frequently played supporting
roles in these tales, as they mourned, worried, pleaded,
and waited. At the same time that these stories challenged
the limits of success and the acceptability of certain forms
of wealth creation, then, they also reafﬁrmed these limits
and reiterated gendered conceptions of national belonging
that privileged the efforts of certain men while denying
presence to various other urban residents. These myths
simultaneously questioned men’s capacity to provide for
households and recentered their exploits as crucial to the
national mythology; in doing so, they recuperated older
myths that linked the pirogue to ideas about brotherly
alliances and national solidarity. These fantastic tales of
failure thus oblige a careful reconsideration of scholarship
that unproblematically centralizes the migrant as a key
actor in contemporary postcolonial societies, one who
sacriﬁces self and rescues the nation. Moreover, they draw
attention to the gendered identities, roles, and relationships

363

American Ethnologist

(cid:2) Volume 38 Number 2 May 2011

to city and nation that emerge amidst shifts in migration
regulation and economic policy.

A genre of urban tales in context

My approach in this article has been shaped by the work
of various scholars who have examined, particularly in con-
texts of profound social transformation, how rumors, anec-
dotes, and tall tales provide urban residents with a means
to collectively examine shifting patterns of inequality, polit-
ical and economic exclusion, national belonging, violence,
and corruption (Ellis 1989; Rafael 1997; Smith 2001, 2007).
These tales spark debate about what is socially acceptable
and what is condemned (Peterson 2009), and they often
question the public’s complicity in the very acts of exclu-
sion or violence they describe (Smith 2001). Particularly
in countries where the media is controlled by the state or
otherwise censored—which, it has been argued, is increas-
ingly the case in contemporary Senegal (see, e.g., Wittmann
2008)—tales, myths, and rumors make public and visible
that which would otherwise remain concealed. Because
Senegalese newspaper and radio reports offered rough and
sometimes contradictory estimates of numbers of voyages
attempted, migrants apprehended and detained, and fatali-
ties en route, tale telling offered the public a valuable source
of updated information and helped render visible and tan-
gible the quiet tragedies unfolding off West Africa’s shores.
Moreover, residents who told such tales often critiqued na-
tional and international leadership as they did so, com-
menting obliquely or frankly on the injustices of migration
policy shifts, on the collusion of their president in repatria-
tion efforts, on the government’s failure to seek concrete so-
lutions to the crisis, and on the dire situation of unemploy-
ment and economic stagnation that drove men to migrate
in the ﬁrst place.

One of the distinguishing features of this storytelling
genre as I have identiﬁed it here is the centrality of the
pirogue, a symbol associated for decades with the vitality
of the Senegalese nation. My ﬁrst encounter with a pirogue
tale took place in 2004, several years before the “crisis”
of clandestine migration captured public attention. Rather
than providing a crash course on the proper forms of greet-
ings, as one might typically expect, my Wolof tutor com-
menced our introductory language lesson by recounting an
origin myth: the name S´en´egal, he explained, was a French
interpretation of the Wolof phrase su˜nu gaal, meaning “our
pirogue.” Prior to colonialism, this oft-told tale goes, ev-
eryday life along the coast centered on the pirogue: on the
nourishment it provided, on the certain rhythms and com-
plementary gender roles it established, and on the sense of
collective responsibility it embodied. After independence
was achieved, the pirogue was recuperated as a symbol of
national unity despite vast ethnic and religious diversity. To
avoid upsetting the metaphorical boat, understood as the

364

nation, the “passengers,” assumed to be men, had to sup-
press their individual desires and work together to address
the needs of the community as a whole. This was a tale re-
counted by other Dakarois during my 2004 research stay
too, as they sought to explain Senegalese conceptions of na-
tion or to describe the sentiments stirred by references to
pirogues in art or music.

By 2006, however, a newer generation of pirogue tales
depicting a nation in crisis began to build on and destabi-
lize these older storytelling conventions. Some urban resi-
dents would refer explicitly to the “old” uses for and mean-
ings of pirogues to illustrate how things had changed. In
contemporary myths, the fabled solidarity of yore was pre-
sented as threatened by the harsh realities of life in uncer-
tain times. The state of national “crisis” with which these
tales grappled (often symbolized by stormy seas or other
challenges) is nothing new, in many ways: It is a condition
of economic uncertainty that stretches back to the global
price ﬂuctuations, climbing national debt, and devastating
ecological changes that marked the 1970s, and it is one that
continues today despite—or in large part because of—the
structural adjustment reforms imposed in the 1980s and
1990s. It is important to note that the austerity measures of
the early 1980s included a push to open Senegal’s maritime
frontier to foreign investment and exploitation. This move
had a devastating impact on the country’s centuries-old ar-
tisanal ﬁshing industry, which holds both economic and
symbolic importance, as the pirogue simply could not com-
pete with hyperefﬁcient foreign ﬁshing supertrawlers. By
2006, experts and government leaders began to publicly ex-
press concern for the future of Senegal’s waters (see Ndiaye
2007). As marine populations dwindled and local ﬁshermen
abandoned the trade, the pirogue was increasingly retooled
as a vehicle for illicit migration and informal economic ac-
tivity, and it was reconceptualized as a sign of ongoing cri-
sis. It was not uncommon in 2006 and 2007 for urban res-
idents to link the perceived disappearance of the working
pirogue from Dakar’s shorelines to broader economic and
social shifts, like the increasing presence of “Asian” invest-
ments, the withering of family occupational legacies, and
the restlessness of unemployed youth. This ancient vessel
came to stand, then, not for the vitality of a nation but
for the endangerment of cherished national livelihoods and
values and the fracturing of solidarities. The ostensible de-
cline of the ﬁshing industry is just one small part of a more
generalized economic crisis—one that feels both newly ur-
gent and exasperatingly routine. This ongoing economic
crisis has, in turn, generated profound social uncertainty, as
adulthood, marriage, and the establishment of families are
delayed or put on hold indeﬁnitely, as gendered roles and
normative values are questioned, and as the legitimacy of
both nation and state are undermined (Buggenhagen 2001;
Diouf 2003). Amidst these changes, talk of crisis became
a “structuring idiom” through which people narrated,

Titanic tales of missing men (cid:2) American Ethnologist

comprehended, and rationalized the uncertainty and ab-
surdity of the everyday (Mbembe and Roitman 1995:325).
And the pirogue, I suggest, emerged as one of the most pow-
erful emblems of the paradoxical reasoning to which people
turned during these disorienting times.3

This new generation of pirogue tales surfaced and cir-
culated in a “structurally adjusted” city where the so-called
informal economy employed a large percentage of the able-
bodied workforce and offered opportunities that were typi-
cally short term, unreliable, and sometimes illegal. As vari-
ous other anthropologists have made clear, these seemingly
“marginal” activities are, in fact, central to household, ur-
ban, and national economies throughout Africa and help
call into question what constitutes marginality, illegality,
and illicitness in the ﬁrst place (see, e.g., Larkin 2008; Roit-
man 2005). Clandestine migration is a complex and inte-
gral part of this economic sphere, one that creates unique
opportunities for proﬁt, mobility, and prestige in uncertain
times and that lures people from throughout the country
and the region to Dakar. One of my interviewees, a skilled
artisan who had been commissioned to carve a pirogue
for migration, explained to me that this particular contract
was “just work” (liggeey rekk)—no more unusual, illegal, or
alarming than any other project he had been hired to do—
and that clandestine migration was just “business” (using
the Wolof pidgin term bizness). (See Figure 3.) As his asser-
tion demonstrates, the “business” of clandestine migration

presented important economic opportunities that were of-
ten deemed acceptable and legitimate (if only temporarily),
and it drew in variously positioned individuals looking to
make ends meet, to physically escape their current circum-
stances, or to make a quick and easy proﬁt. Paradoxically,
it was through participation in the seemingly “marginal”
practice of clandestine migration by pirogue that candidats
hoped to overcome their marginal economic and social po-
sitions. Urban residents, in turn, used tale telling to explore
the shifting boundaries differentiating legal from illegal, le-
gitimate from illicit, that this booming economy imposed.

It is important to note, too, that the emergence of this
mythmaking genre coincided with the launching of sev-
eral large-scale urban construction projects, which strained
daily routines and brought trafﬁc to a halt, as well as with
frequent but unpredictable electricity outages, escalating
prices for staples like rice and fuel, and the overburden-
ing of infrastructures providing services like health care.
Pirogue tales were therefore often told as people sat and
waited—for trafﬁc jams to ease, for electricity to return,
for long lines to move, for ﬂeeting economic opportunities
to appear. Interestingly, youth (particularly young men) in
Dakar typically employed the Wolof word toog—literally, to
sit or to wait—when describing their frustrated plans to mi-
grate.4 From this perspective, then, the tales both emerged
within and perpetuated a state of restless anxiety and fer-
vent anticipation about the future, and they indexed a

Figure 3. A skilled artisan and his team (along with several neighborhood children) carve a pirogue for clandestine passage. He insisted that this contract
was “just work,” no more unusual, illegal, or alarming than any other project he had worked on, and that clandestine migration was just “business.”

365

American Ethnologist

(cid:2) Volume 38 Number 2 May 2011

particular type of transnational movement as a key element
of contemporary Senegalese identities.

Public conﬁgurations of success and nation

In this section, I return to the tale of the doomed Titanique
as a means to explore shifting ideas about success and in-
dividual and national economic security in Dakar post–
structural adjustment. In a context of profound economic
uncertainty and amidst daily reports of sinking pirogues,
Ousseynou’s particular tale can be read as contributing to
public debates about the acceptability of “investment” in
clandestine migration. Although the name Titanique was
likely chosen by its architects to celebrate the vessel’s ex-
traordinary size (see Tall 2008:49), my conversation with
Ousseynou draws attention to the alternative meanings and
ironies that urban residents generated through this tale.
Young Senegalese are familiar with the story of the Titanic
and its fate, which they encounter through the Hollywood
blockbuster of the same name (Cameron 1997), dubbed
in French and sold with other bootleg videos in Dakar’s
bustling markets.5 The ﬁlm’s themes of tragic loss, heroic
bravery, and sunken fortunes aligned well with discourses
in circulation about the dangers and seductions of clandes-
tine migration, and its theatrical quality seemed to capture
the sense of surreality that characterized daily life in the city
(see Anjaria and Anjaria 2008). Not only was the Titanique
“built too big” in comparison with the typical pirogue used
for clandestine migration but it was also rumored to be
headed to the United States, imagined by many Senegalese
during this time period as a land of unbridled economic
possibility and entrepreneurial self-making. Greedy too was
the pirogue’s rumored “owner,” who built a much larger ves-
sel than usual to accommodate more paying passengers—
without concern for consequence.6 On dozens of previ-
ous occasions, Ousseynou himself had dismissed clandes-
tine migration by pirogue as both foolhardy and a waste of
money, and several other urban youths with whom I spoke
about the tale suggested that they would have put such a
large sum of money to better use. Nonetheless, Ousseynou,
like many of his peers, spoke frequently of his hopes and
plans to migrate and described his own future as contin-
gent on his ability to ﬁnd work abroad. Ousseynou’s story
thus aligns well with recent anthropological theorizations
of millennial capitalism: Wealth conjured from “nothing”
is frequently regarded with a rather paradoxical mixture
of fear, suspicion, and awe (Comaroff and Comaroff 2001;
Geschiere 1997; Masquelier 2000). The tale crystallized as a
sort of urban parable that simultaneously expressed a deep
ambivalence about economic and physical risk taking and
reafﬁrmed conceptions of the diaspora as a sphere of al-
most magical wealth creation.

At the center of fantastic tales like Ousseynou’s is the
ﬁgure of the adventure-seeking migrant, hailed for decades

366

as a national hero because of his presumed (and often imag-
inary) success and wealth. Prior to the imposition of struc-
tural adjustment reforms, it was the “salaried man”—the
postcolonial functionary who helped to construct the na-
tion while providing for the needs of his family—who was
imagined as the model of success in Senegal (Ban´egas and
Warnier 2008; see also Mbembe and Roitman 1995). This
esteemed ﬁgure achieved his position through education
and by exploiting familial and social connections in ways
that echoed patterns of colonial privilege. This highly visi-
ble ﬁgure effected social change through his collaboration
with a cohort of similarly positioned and privileged men.
The trimming of state institutions and budgets in the early
1980s, however, eroded the value of a university education,
rendered the coveted salary an object of nostalgia, and de-
stroyed many men’s hopes for ﬁnding work in the public
sector.7

Senegalese had been migrating to other African coun-
tries, to the Middle East, and to Europe for over a cen-
tury by this time, through the citizenship privileges af-
forded by France to an educated urban elite during and
after colonialism, as laborers in factories and ﬁelds, and
through religious networks oriented toward engagement
with Islamic centers of learning and worship. But increas-
ing economic uncertainty in the 1980s and 1990s, combined
with worsening drought conditions in Senegal’s agricultural
zones, prompted a dramatic surge in migrants seeking op-
portunity abroad, with many heading to somewhat newer
destinations, including the United States, Spain, and Italy
(Riccio 2005; Stoller 2002; Tandian 2008).8 It was during
this time that Senegal became principally a country of emi-
gration rather than immigration. Migrants, overwhelmingly
men, often left behind large families and accrued signiﬁ-
cant economic and social debts, owed to their families or
communities for helping to ﬁnance their journeys. Seldom
Senegal’s poorest, this generation of migrants departed in
search of economic opportunity but also in pursuit of the
social capital, the sense of moral fulﬁllment, and the oppor-
tunities for community building that migration promised
(Babou 2002). Today, ofﬁcial ﬁgures suggest that nearly half
a million Senegalese are living abroad and that they remit
about $270 million a year (Barro 2008:144). The Senegalese
government estimates that 76 percent of urban households
have at least one member working abroad (R´epublique du
S´en´egal 2004). It is quite likely, however, that these ﬁgures
underestimate the scope of Senegalese migration and re-
mittance activity.

In recent decades, Senegal’s transnational migrants
have often stepped in where the “adjusted” state has bowed
out: They pay for the school fees, medical care, and day-to-
day expenses of an extended network of kin (Buggenhagen
2001, 2004); they ﬁnance public services and infrastruc-
tures (Kane 2002), build houses and apartment complexes
(Melly 2010; Tall 1994), and construct mosques; and they

invest in small businesses (Diatta and Mbow 1999) and
development projects (Kane 2002). The contemporary mi-
grant is also imagined to be able to afford and accom-
plish the rites of passage—namely, marrying, building a
house, having children, and funding religious ceremonies—
that mark the transition into male adulthood. These mi-
grants’ quite visible purchases and projects have, in turn,
further cemented popular conceptions of the diaspora as
a place of unbridled economic possibility (Fouquet 2008);
of Senegal as a “culture [or nation] of migration” (Willems
2008), one whose past and present alike have been shaped
not by bountiful natural resources but, instead, by the
hard work and dedication of its globally dispersed pop-
ulation; and of Dakar as a city whose spaces and priv-
ileges often seem most available to those who have left
(Melly 2010). Moreover, both the nation and its capital
city are reafﬁrmed as spaces and communities that are
constructed through gendered movements, decisions, and
investments.

By the early 1990s, the transnational migrant had thus
eclipsed the salaried man as a central ﬁgure of postcolonial
success (Bredeloup 2008; Riccio 2005), one whose acts of
self-sacriﬁce propped up both household and nation in an
era of economic calamity. In song, ﬁlm, and public and gov-
ernment discourse, the hardworking migrant has been cel-
ebrated for his practical knowledge, his humble beginnings,
and his ability to manage or get by (se d´ebrouiller) in a harsh
economic climate. Many of these migrants, often called
“modou-modou,” were members of extensive transnational
trade networks and were able to migrate through their afﬁl-
iation with the Murid Way, a Suﬁ brotherhood whose role
in global commerce is particularly well documented (Diouf
and Rendall 2000). In other instances, male kin living in
the diaspora would help family members ﬁnance and apply
for visas, or they would send their own passports for rela-
tives left behind in Senegal to use. The coveted role of the
hardworking migrant is thus frequently described by Sene-
galese and by scholars as a deeply gendered role, one in-
herited or passed through networks of “brothers,” both fa-
milial and spiritual (Ebin 1992). Moreover, these academic
and popular analyses reassert that the nation is contingent
on the exploits of men who work in solidarity for a greater
good, echoing assumptions about the salaried man of ear-
lier decades. This point is well illustrated by the situation
of Ousseynou’s brothers. About eight months prior to the
conversations I recount here, Ousseynou’s oldest brother,
who was working for one of Senegal’s political parties, was
invited to attend a political event in Italy that was geared
toward building support among the Senegalese diaspora
there. At the last minute, this elder brother was unable to
attend the event, so he used his connections to arrange for
a visa to send the family’s youngest brother in his place.
A maternal uncle stepped in to ﬁnance the journey of this
youngest sibling, who had been chosen as his brother’s

Titanic tales of missing men (cid:2) American Ethnologist

substitute because he was unemployed in Dakar. Af-
ter the political event, this youngest brother was able
to secure a residency permit, and he found work as a
commerc¸ant in an Italian city. With a tinge of regret for
his own inability to migrate, Ousseynou described his
brother as successful and as the pride of his parents, who
relied on the money he sent each month via Western
Union.

Although quite commonplace in previous decades, the
kind of good fortune Ousseynou’s brothers enjoyed had be-
come rather exceptional by the time of my research. The
pirogue tales that circulated in Dakar in 2007, I suggest,
both reﬂected and stirred public anxiety about the tight-
ening of migration regulations over the previous decade
and Senegalese men’s concomitant failure to migrate. “Be-
fore,” Ousseynou explained wistfully, “ﬁve brothers in the
same household could go abroad. With Diouf [the preced-
ing president], it was easy . . . there were families where most
of the working-age men were abroad . . . It all changed with
the alternance.”9 Ousseynou’s comment and the Titanique
tale he recounted point to the increasing tension between
contemporary formulations of success and of nation, on the
one hand, and the realities of global migration, on the other.
The rupture in access to mobility that Ousseynou identiﬁes
with the beginning of current president Abdoulaye Wade’s
administration, in fact, involves a complex set of factors.
Throughout the 20th century, Senegalese migrants had re-
course to various channels of legal migration as students,
laborers (particularly in Europe), tourists, working profes-
sionals, and family members of more established migrants.
Those who were not able to migrate through these chan-
nels turned to various extralegal practices—including us-
ing others’ passports, purchasing false papers, overstaying
tourist or education visas, and paying human smugglers—
to get abroad. Over the past decade, however, migration
policies in receiving countries have become more strin-
gent, as conservative political movements based on claims
of autochthony gather momentum, as anxieties over dwin-
dling employment opportunities and overburdened state
welfare systems mount, and as “newer” migrants from other
parts of the world, including postsocialist Europe, compete
for limited visas. States have also adopted more rigorous
strategies to deter and discipline undocumented migrants,
making once-critical extralegal tactics increasingly likely to
fail.10 These shifts—which many of Dakar’s residents de-
scribed as abrupt and even violent ruptures in migration
policy—have been motivated both by heightened anxieties
about “security” post–September 11 and, more recently, by
a global economic downturn that has diminished Europe’s
need for unskilled and semiskilled labor, particularly in sec-
tors like agriculture and housing construction. As move-
ments are constricted, some hopeful migrants turn to more
dangerous and extralegal means—like clandestine pirogue
voyages—to get abroad.

367

American Ethnologist

(cid:2) Volume 38 Number 2 May 2011

As Ousseynou’s claim—that, before 2000, “ﬁve broth-
ers in the same family could go abroad”—makes clear, these
dramatic shifts were imagined in particular as undermining
masculine identities and severing networks of familial and
spiritual kin. The pirogue tales I recount here coincided, in
fact, with heated protests over proposed “illegal immigra-
tion reform” measures in the United States and with immi-
gration choisie debates in France, a country with one of the
largest populations of Senegalese migrants. The immigra-
tion reform bill that resulted from French debates made visa
policies more exclusive and included a controversial pro-
vision that allowed consular ofﬁcials to require applicants
for family reuniﬁcation visas whose dossiers were deemed
dubious to furnish DNA samples to “prove” their kinship
ties. Such exclusionary migration policies were perceived
in deeply personal terms by my informants in Senegal, a
nation whose identity has become so deeply imbricated
with the itineraries of its migrant citizens. These regulatory
shifts underscored migration as an activity that is generated
by and solidiﬁes networks of biological kin, and they legit-
imized discourses of “choice” and “self-selection” as inte-
gral features of contemporary migration regulation.

Once considered a matter of exploiting social networks
and seeking brotherly aid, migration is increasingly imag-
ined as an individualized activity, as a matter of chance
or luck, and as involving a personal engagement with risk.
These shifts in popular conceptions dovetail neatly—and
not coincidentally—with development rubrics that privi-
lege entrepreneurial risk taking and future-oriented invest-
ment. Like many of my informants who related tales of
clandestine passage, Ousseynou explicitly used the French
words l’entrepreneur and l’investissement to describe the
characters and activities in his story. As tales of doomed voy-
ages were circulating through Dakar, so were the vocabular-
ies and formulas of neoliberal economic reform. Through
large-scale infrastructural development projects, “partner-
ships” with foreign investors, and ambitious media cam-
paigns, President Wade has sought to recast Senegal’s ailing
economy as “emergent” and to reorient the public’s focus
away from nagging present impossibilities and toward the
spectacular future that awaits the nation. On a more indi-
vidual scale, state and nongovernmental organizations have
instituted dozens of microcredit programs—often modeled
on indigenous rotating credit schemes called “tontines” or
“mbotaay”—as a means of molding an entrepreneurial cit-
izenry and developing personal responsibility.11 These ofﬁ-
cial vocabularies and ideals also infuse everyday conversa-
tions and strategies: During the course of my research, for
instance, I met many self-described (almost always male)
“entrepreneurs”—state workers who described their plans
for small businesses on the side, cab drivers who stud-
ied English-language manuals while stuck in trafﬁc jams,
or unemployed youth who handed out homemade busi-
ness cards and offered a hodgepodge of practical services.

368

Suzanne Scheld (2007) offers similar observations, arguing
that Dakar’s youth increasingly fashion themselves as en-
trepreneurs to navigate the city’s ever-expanding informal
economy.

The pirogue tales that surfaced in 2006 and 2007 ex-
plicitly interrogated these shifting identities and priorities,
calling into question the goals and tactics of “owners” who
construct pirogues doomed to fail and of passengers who
seek success and wealth in the diaspora by risking their own
lives. For the hopeful migrant, the tales insist, brotherly ties
and hard work are no longer sufﬁcient; instead, migration
is a matter of luck, of chance, of risking one’s life savings (or
those of family) and one’s life. Success, moreover, is increas-
ingly achieved through involvement in the informal eco-
nomic sector, often through illegal or otherwise clandestine
activities. Urban residents used tale telling to come to terms
with these unsettling shifts, in which the present moment
was evacuated in favor of possible futures, in which individ-
ualism seemed to trump a mythical sense of masculine sol-
idarity, in which family “traditions” of male migration were
disrupted, and in which the boundaries between licit and il-
licit, legal and illegal, seemed to be blurred. These tales were
also nostalgic, however; at the same time that they reﬂected
on the failure of masculine networks, they also recentered
brotherly networks as crucial to the project of migration
and, by extension, the nation.12 Pirogue stories simultane-
ously signaled new concerns about social presence and the
present, and they recuperated and reafﬁrmed as culturally
signiﬁcant older ideas about masculine accomplishment
and brotherly aid. By casting men as “missing,” urban res-
idents brought to public attention the predicament of so-
cial presence in contemporary Dakar: If male adulthood
and success were contingent on migration, and migra-
tion regulations and surveillance policies increasingly ex-
cluded Senegalese men from participation, urban resi-
dents wondered, how were men expected to become “big”
(grand)—successful and respected adults—within their
communities?

Becoming “big”

I turn my attention in this section to another urban story,
one narrated by Souleymane, a repatriated migrant who
had successfully reached the shores of New Jersey in late
2006. Souleymane’s tale brings into focus how this genre of
mythmaking not only reﬂected on the situation of missing
men who sought urban presence and success through clan-
destine means but also produced these highly visible na-
tional ﬁgures and helped to redeﬁne the contours of suc-
cess. Typically, in Senegal, departing migrants are funded,
at least in part, by community or family contributions, and
they are sent on their way only after a celebratory meal,
one that often involves visits from various supplicants, well-
wishers, and spiritual guides. But, toward the end of 2006,

as death tolls and public anxiety rose, clandestine migra-
tion by pirogue became a more hushed affair accomplished
through individual investment and less frequently accom-
panied by public ritual. As Souleymane himself phrased it,
by the winter of 2006, no mother would have given her
blessing for her son to participate in such a voyage, as the
risks had become apparent. Instead, I was told, migrants hid
their true intentions as they arranged for cash, and they dis-
closed their plans to few, for fear that hushed rumors might
spark police investigations and shut down the clandestine
operation. Migrants who survived the voyage placed calls
home only after they had successfully arrived at their des-
tinations or once they had been placed in detention. These
trips thus signaled a shift in migration tactics and cultural
perceptions and also indexed a particular sense of urgency
on the part of individual candidats.

It is important to note that tales of clandestine passage
circulated in a context in which an estimated 48 percent of
the population is classiﬁed as “unemployed”(Central Intel-
ligence Agency 2009). Many of Dakar’s un- and underem-
ployed men lead ambulatory lifestyles in search of work,
seasonal opportunities, extended network connections, or
entertainment and adventure, and so their periods of ab-
sence may not be cause for alarm under ordinary circum-
stances. But, amidst the pirogue “crisis” in the city, ab-
sent men became hypervisible. This claim is well illustrated,
for instance, by Ousseynou’s description of frantic mothers
who, about two weeks after the vessel’s disappearance, be-
gan to speculate publicly that their sons had boarded the
Titanique. Ousseynou too identiﬁed a close friend who had
gone missing around the time that the infamous pirogue
disappeared. The Titanique tale roused similar reactions
from other urban residents, who likewise called attention to
neighborhood men whose absences were suspicious. But,
in fact, reports later surfaced that police in Ruﬁsque had
conﬁscated the Titanique before it had ever departed for the
United States. The tales that circulated in the city nonethe-
less served to make spectacularly present men who would
otherwise have warranted quite little public attention or
interest—even though these men had, in fact, never really
left.

Around the same time that Titanique tales circulated in
the city, I heard incredible stories about a group of young
men who had made it to the United States aboard a pirogue
and had recently been repatriated. Through a network of
informants, I was introduced to Souleymane, one of these
neighborhood celebrities. On the morning of our scheduled
meeting, Souleymane, an unmarried Dakar native in his
midthirties, met me at the corner of his street to escort me
to his parents’ house. The road had been cordoned off and
tables, large loudspeakers, and hundreds of plastic chairs
had been set up in preparation for a celebration. Elabo-
rately dressed guests began to crowd the narrow street. As
he led me through the crowd, Souleymane spoke above

Titanic tales of missing men (cid:2) American Ethnologist

the clamor, explaining that his neighbors were hosting a
baptism (ng´ente), ﬁnanced by a son who lived and worked
abroad. Once we had navigated through the dense crowds
and settled in his quiet room, Souleymane’s efforts at con-
versation ended abruptly. He solemnly retrieved a small
wooden chest from a dresser in the corner and brought it
to where I was seated. As he emptied the contents of the
chest onto the bed beside me, I had the certain impres-
sion that I was witnessing a sort of ritual, a ceremony that
had been performed for many other captivated guests be-
fore me. Carefully arranged on the bed for my inspection
was “proof” of his legendary voyage—photos of the boat
and its captain, Souleymane’s friend; assorted processing
forms from the detention center in New Jersey; paperwork
for obtaining phone cards while at the facility; information
about translator services; and a pamphlet detailing the pro-
cedures for his return to Senegal.

He then told his tale with the same sort of meticu-
lous care he had used to assemble this exhibit. Before his
trip, he explained, he had been employed as a carpenter
for a furniture workshop in Medina. His childhood friend,
Pape, was the caretaker for a ﬁshing schooner—which, in
line with the emergent storytelling conventions I describe
above, he nonetheless called a “pirogue”—and it was this
friend who had come up with idea of taking the vessel to
the United States. Pape had worked on ﬁshing pirogues for
over a decade, and so Souleymane trusted his friend’s abil-
ity to get them safely to their destination. Though other par-
ticipants had to pay for their spots, Souleymane paid noth-
ing because Pape was “like a brother” to him; he would
never have been able to migrate otherwise, he explained.
They left under the cover of darkness, and he told no one of
his plans—though his mother immediately noticed his ab-
sence. For over an hour, Souleymane offered vivid details
of his departure from the shores of Dakar, the chal-
lenges the passengers endured at sea, the two months he
spent in detention in New Jersey, and his eventual re-
turn home. Perhaps most fantastic was Souleymane’s de-
scription of the passengers’ physical confrontations with
risk:

Souleymane: The voyage was terrible. Like a nightmare.
The pirogue was 18 meters by 10 meters. The sails were
destroyed after just a couple of days. We took on wa-
ter. We never had enough food to eat and had to col-
lect rainwater to drink, because our supplies for drink-
ing and cooking were exhausted so quickly. It was hard,
hard, hard. One night, we faced a huge storm and the
boat was taking on water. It was hard. Several times,
we said that we might not survive. But God is great. If I
was going to die, I was going to die. In the night, some-
one went overboard, and the captain [Pape], who could
swim well, went to rescue him. I threw them life vests.
My friend took a risk to help the man who had been
swallowed by the sea. There was panic on the pirogue,

369

American Ethnologist

(cid:2) Volume 38 Number 2 May 2011

too, when it started taking on water, and we all had to
work together.

Author: Who were the other passengers? Were there
women onboard?

S: Women? Ha! They would never last. They would die.
A pirogue is not a place for women.

This excerpt and the larger tale of which it is a part cast
the missing man—in this case, the narrator himself—as a
central participant in a physical and spiritual battle against
the sea, imagined as an uncertain place offering nothing to
grip or hold onto (geej amul bankaas). This tale meshes well
with popular and scholarly accounts of pirogue voyages, in
which passengers are pushed to their limits and must work
as a team to endure storms, depleted supplies, battered
vessels, illness, and accidents. Though there were reports
of female candidats as well, Souleymane’s assertion that a
pirogue was “not a place for women” underscored popular
assumptions that men were most capable of guiding such
a vessel—and, by implication, the nation it symbolized—
through tumultuous weather and uncertain waters. These
voyages typically took on a deeply spiritual tone as well.
Souleymane had left Dakar only once before, to take part
in the annual religious pilgrimage to the Murid holy city of
Touba, to participate in the Grand Magal, which commem-
orates the exile by colonial authorities of the brotherhood’s
founder, Cheikh Amadou Bamba.13 When he boarded the
pirogue in hopes of ﬁnding work abroad, Souleymane ex-
plained, he was inspired by the saintly leader’s mantra that
hard work was a path to salvation, and he found strength
in Bamba’s own story of conﬁnement and return. Not only
did this pirogue voyage foster brotherly solidarity among
participants, who risked their lives and (for some) fortunes
in violent waters, but it also conﬁrmed Souleymane’s devo-
tion to a wider brotherhood of Murid faithful—a group for
whom spirituality and migration are inextricably linked. In
the previous section, I explored how migration, once a mat-
ter of exploiting brotherly networks, is increasingly imag-
ined as an individualized activity, as a matter of chance
or luck, and as involving a personal engagement with risk.
Souleymane’s tale indexes these shifts and also draws atten-
tion to the emergence of new brotherly networks and mas-
culine identities as others are dismantled. As Caitlin Zaloom
(2004) has noted of an entirely different sort of risk takers—
pit traders at the Chicago Board of Trade—active and volun-
tary engagement with risk shapes both self and community.
Through claims of brave encounters with risk, made visible
to audiences through descriptions of an enraged sea, candi-
dats like Souleymane were able to lay claim to a new sort of
identity and to membership in a broader network of “broth-
ers” related through their shared goals and trials.

Despite his participation in this fantastic adventure,
Souleymane acknowledged that he was haunted by a sense
of shame (gacce), as he had not been able to migrate and

370

ﬁnd work, to care for his family, to ﬁnd a wife and afford
marriage rituals, to gain respect and become a leader in
his community—in his words, to become “big” (grand).14
Brotherly networks had failed to get (or at least keep)
Souleymane abroad, and his heroic battle with the seas had
only landed him back where he started. The somber tone
of our conversation contrasted starkly with the rhythms of
the lively baptism celebration, now in full swing, just out-
side the window. Just an hour before, we had come into
contact—in quite corporeal ways—with the impetus that
had led Souleymane abroad in the ﬁrst place. Amidst what
is being called a “crisis of masculinity” in Africa—a term
scholars use to describe the failure of youth to become men,
particularly post–structural adjustment—transnational mi-
gration has emerged as a crucial strategy for ﬁnancing tra-
ditional rites of passage (see Johnson-Hanks 2007), includ-
ing the ng´ente. Unlike his absent neighbor—who was able
to migrate, marry, have children, and ﬁnance elaborate cer-
emonies for his family—Souleymane himself was unable to
afford the rites of passage that would mark his own transi-
tion into full social adulthood.

Souleymane’s anxieties about his failure to migrate
and to become big, though sincere, were nonetheless jux-
taposed with his newfound social presence, paradoxically
achieved through his tale of failed migration. His story of
survival repositioned him not as a youth who sits and waits
(toog) for opportunities to come his way but as a man who
moves and travels and sees the world. He and his fellow pas-
sengers did not sit passively and wait to arrive at their des-
tination; they battled risk and worked together as brothers.
Though Souleymane’s efforts to migrate ended in failure, his
attempted voyage and subsequent repatriation nonetheless
enabled him to achieve social visibility as one who had
worked hard, taken risks, and experienced life elsewhere.
Moreover, his collection of documents made his presence
on U.S. soil a seemingly irrefutable fact, and his dramatic
re-creation of his adventure produced his absence in spec-
tacular ways for a captivated audience. When I asked if he
regretted his trip and the difﬁcult period of detention that
followed, Souleymane was ﬁrm that he regretted nothing:
“Time passes quickly, and you must do well with the time
that you have, so that your reputation will be good. Your
reputation is all you have after death. You have to maintain
your reputation, so that people will say, ‘He was good and
courageous and generous,’ because life only lasts so long.”
Transnational migration not only ﬁnances rites of passage
but it has also become a key rite of passage in and of it-
self, one that enables men to claim social adulthood and
respect (see Mains 2007). The social visibility afforded by
tales of failed migration is necessarily transitory and always
contested, however, and at the time of our meeting, Souley-
mane had already begun to consider plans for another jour-
ney, this time to Europe. He was back working as a carpen-
ter, he explained, and was saving his money with the hopes

of “buying” a visa and moving to Amsterdam, where an-
other “brother” had settled. Though visas were a matter of
luck, Souleymane insisted, he was determined to get abroad
again.

Wandering men on a trip to nowhere

I have argued here that pirogue myths enabled public de-
bate about the changing parameters of male social visibility
and success in Dakar at the same time that they paradox-
ically recast as spectacularly present men who had failed
to achieve by these social standards. An uncritical analysis
of these tales might initially suggest that women were help-
less bystanders to the clandestine practices described here,
that they were left to wait, watch, agonize, and mourn as
men actively confronted ﬁnancial and physical risks. In this
sense, these tales and rumors recuperate older themes cen-
tral to pirogue mythologies: that men face the daunting seas
while women wait on shore, eager to collect and prepare
their catch. In pirogue tales and other popular migration ac-
counts, women wait for remittances made possible by clan-
destine pirogue journeys, or they wait for the return of their
husbands and sons—through repatriation or the recovery
of their bodies. Moreover, in both Ousseynou’s and Souley-
mane’s renditions, it is women—particularly mothers and
wives—who initially bring public attention to the absence
of men. At ﬁrst glance, then, these two tales seem to suggest
that urban women play mere supporting roles to the “miss-
ing” men they evoke, men whose spectacular sacriﬁces are
aimed at bringing about alternative futures. In this sense,
these tales not only speak of men who are missing, in that
they have disappeared and cannot be found, but they also
suggest that men are missed, that they leave behind in-
complete and fractured households (Blackwood 2005) and
nations.

But, in fact, many men in Senegalese society are al-
ready “absent” in various ways from the home: For genera-
tions, many have participated in urban–rural migration cur-
rents that keep them away from family for periods of the
year; they frequently do not have absolute authority over
household budgeting or decision making but, instead, hold
roles that are distinct from but complementary to those
of women; and men in polygamous marriages most of-
ten live separately from their wives and are only present
in their wives’ households for parts of the week. These so-
cial realities suggest that men’s absence from the house-
hold is not necessarily extraordinary, nor are men who
spend time elsewhere necessarily “missed.” Scholars work-
ing in the context of Senegal have, furthermore, demon-
strated that women have, in fact, long claimed central roles
in shaping male migrants’ itineraries and decisions and that
they have actively established personal autonomy and so-
cial prestige through their husbands’ and sons’ absence
and earnings (Bouilly 2008; Buggenhagen 2001). Though

Titanic tales of missing men (cid:2) American Ethnologist

they depend on male remittances to ﬁnance religious cer-
emonies, engage in ostentatious consumption practices,
and furnish family homes, women also increasingly pro-
vide for households themselves by working outside the
home. And yet, although women-headed households have
become rather typical in contemporary Senegal, they are
nonetheless imagined as contingent on the “absent pres-
ence” (Battaglia 1994:631) of the male migrant. The social
status of these missing men, however, is always contested
and ambivalent. Though candidats garner social presence
through their absence—especially, I have shown, through
urban mythmaking practices—this presence is also chal-
lenged through this same practice of tale telling. Women are
crucial participants in these debates. In this section, I turn
my attention to a tale told by two women, one that belied
assumptions that men were really “missing.”

In February of 2007, I hosted a dinner party for two
dear friends, A¨ıda and Yaye. Both women were in their early
thirties, were well educated, and worked in the private sec-
tor. The occasion was intended, in part, to celebrate A¨ıda’s
recent—and quite sudden—marriage to a man I had not
yet met. Just about six months earlier, A¨ıda’s ﬁrst marriage
had dissolved when her husband, who lived and worked
in France, announced the arrival of his new infant son—
fathered by a girlfriend that A¨ıda had not known existed.15
When A¨ıda called to tell me the news of her remarriage, she
was eager to pass the phone to her new husband, an em-
ployee at the U.S. embassy in Dakar, explaining that he was
working hard at the embassy so he could migrate and that
he wanted to speak to me about life in the United States.16 In
contrast, Yaye, one of A¨ıda’s closest friends, had never been
married. She lived at home with her aging adoptive mother,
a divorc´ee who had rescued her from rural poverty and had
cared for her since her youth. Yaye wanted desperately to
marry so that she could establish her own home and be re-
lieved of some of her caretaking duties, but suitable male
partners were lacking, and Yaye’s enormous household re-
sponsibilities left her with little time to socialize.

As we dined by candlelight in the throes of one of
Dakar’s routine power outages, the three of us talked about
A¨ıda’s new husband before the conversation shifted to pol-
itics and the upcoming presidential election. Both women
were outspoken critics of President Wade, and on this par-
ticular evening, they slammed his administration for its
laissez-faire attitude toward unemployment. Yaye herself
had spent nearly half of the previous year searching for
work—despite a stellar resum´e and a diplˆome from a rep-
utable business school in the city—and her assessment of
Wade’s campaign promises and performance was partic-
ularly pointed. These women regarded unemployment as
part of a broader social crisis, one that affected not just
men’s identities and strategies but women’s as well. As the
lively debate faded into a brooding silence, A¨ıda suddenly
became gleeful, as she recalled a pirogue tale she had heard

371

American Ethnologist

(cid:2) Volume 38 Number 2 May 2011

a week earlier, one with which we were all familiar. The plot
centered on a lucrative scheme concocted by a few youths
in Dakar, who allegedly charged hopeful migrants from ru-
ral West Africa and Asia for a trip to the Canary Islands. Their
pirogue, stocked with food, medicine, and water, departed
from Dakar in the dark of night. The passengers, who were
neither well educated nor well traveled, had not realized
that they were taken only as far as Saly Portugal, a tourist
enclave about 65 miles south of Dakar that is frequented al-
most exclusively by Europeans. A¨ıda was dismissive of the
gullible villageois and foreigners, and Yaye, whose reaction
to the tale was more subdued, added her disapproval of
the urban tricksters who had become rich at the expense
of others. My friends marveled together at the short dis-
tance the candidats had traveled and at how much money
they had “invested” to engage in an activity that seemed to
make so little sense. The women, who had just slammed
Wade’s administration for doing so little to counteract un-
employment, now took pleasure in the rumored predica-
ment of the would-be migrants, whose desperate search for
masculine adulthood and global mobility had landed them
back where they started. The two erupted into laughter as
A¨ıda exclaimed, “I hear that they are still wandering around,
thinking they are in Europe!”

In contrast to Souleymane’s and Ousseynou’s candi-
dats, A¨ıda and Yaye’s central characters were seduced by a
mirage, one that made migration and social success seem
within their reach despite the odds. They did not describe
mysterious voyages, heroic pursuits, or clandestine move-
ments that brought public visibility to marginalized men;
they focused, instead, on the fact that these men ended
up back where they started. I was, in many ways, left un-
comfortable by my friends’ lighthearted account of this
voyage-to-nowhere. In a context of ongoing crisis and pro-
found loss, their amusement seemed rather inappropri-
ate and insensitive, particularly given the relative class sta-
tus the two enjoyed.17 But it also became clear that, by
telling this tale, these women were able to position them-
selves as participants in debates about men’s migration and
the nation. These women did not romanticize brotherhood
or masculine solidarity, nor did they frame candidats’ ef-
forts as valiant, cunning, or productive. Instead, they de-
scribed a motley group of missing men who found them-
selves, by chance, in the same boat. Their tale thus called
into question the implicit (and sometimes explicit) framing
of pirogue voyages as opportunities for marginalized men
to reclaim their role in the nation’s future, highlighting, in-
stead, the transnational character of the voyage. These were
not national adventurers working toward a shared goal,
A¨ıda and Yaye suggested, but a group of unrelated men with
few other options. The pirogue itself was not an imposing
vessel (like Ousseynou’s Titanique), a site where men rein-
vented themselves (as Souleymane had claimed), or a sym-
bol of national unity and struggle (as both men’s stories sug-

372

gested). It was simply an ordinary wooden ﬁshing boat, one
that never strayed too far from shore. The pirogue’s pas-
sengers were not cosmopolitan adventurers, the women as-
serted, and the foreign paradise these candidats found so
dazzling was actually just a short drive from Dakar. These
wandering men were neither knowledgeable investors nor
risk-taking entrepreneurs but, instead, were pawns in a lu-
crative scheme designed to capitalize on their marginality
and desperation. They were not missed but lost, led astray
by spectacular but shallow promises of wealth and success.
A¨ıda’s triumphant ﬁnal addition to the tale—that they were
still wandering around—suggests that the duped men were
the last to realize their own failures, clinging, instead, to
false conceptions of their own worth and futures.

Despite their laughter, I knew well that A¨ıda and Yaye
held much more ambivalent viewpoints on migration and
the future of the nation. Both women were economically in-
dependent and used their salaries to support larger house-
holds. Yaye, in particular, had spent her adult life car-
ing ﬁnancially and emotionally for her adoptive mother,
whose two sons lived abroad. A¨ıda had recently traveled to
the United States as part of a distinguished program run by
the U.S. government, and she claimed on her return that she
could have stayed more permanently, had she not had so
many responsibilities at home. In contrast to the wandering
men they evoke, A¨ıda and Yaye expressed attainable goals,
fulﬁlled duties and expectations, traveled abroad, and sac-
riﬁced themselves for the good of their families. Yet it was
migrant men—and even men who failed to migrate—whose
activities and absences seemed to count, to garner public
attention, and to bring about the nation. It was the sacri-
ﬁces of men gone “missing” that were debated in the murals
on the city’s walls and in high-level international meetings.
Though A¨ıda and Yaye were independent and resourceful,
each nonetheless acknowledged in her own way that hav-
ing a migrant husband was central to the life she imagined
for herself. Yaye, unmarried and born into modest circum-
stances, seemed particularly caught between ﬁnding hu-
mor in the candidats’ naive adventure and sympathizing
with the men and their present predicament. Yet it was not
necessarily men themselves whom these women missed
but the opportunities and alternative futures opened up
through men’s absence, through their own marriage to mi-
grants. A¨ıda and Yaye’s tale disrupted nostalgic represen-
tations that romanticized pirogue voyages and rendered
“missing men” hyperpresent, pointing, instead, to the de-
ceptions and gendered exclusions that these tales both re-
lied on and enacted. But their rendition was also an am-
bivalent one, burdened by the women’s own experiences
with men, migration, cultural expectations, and economic
uncertainty in a postcolonial context. Similarly, A¨ıda and
Yaye’s tale did not present a singular stance on a sensitive
subject but, instead, contributed in contradictory and hesi-
tant ways to an already complex public debate.

Querying the missing man

The pirogue tales I have related here are neither ﬁc-
tions nor fantasies but, rather, part of a rich tradition of
public commentary and engagement, one that is partic-
ularly notable in postcolonial Africa. They were carefully
crafted by variously positioned urban residents—by men
and women, by educated professionals and the unem-
ployed, by hopeful migrants and by outspoken critics of
clandestine migration—all of whom were moved in some
way by the events unfolding in 2006 and 2007. These tales
surfaced throughout the city—around shared bowls of rice
and ﬁsh, on radio call-in shows, in shops and markets, in
newspaper stories, among passengers on car rapides stuck
in trafﬁc jams—and they both reﬂected and generated a
general sense of anxiety and anticipation. They were deeply
personal accounts, inextricable from the everyday experi-
ences and expectations of their narrators and audiences.
They were at once cautionary and celebratory, mournful
and eerily hopeful, nostalgic and future focused. In contrast
to “ofﬁcial” reports, which offered only vague and imper-
sonal estimates of voyages and fatalities, pirogue tales ren-
dered the crisis visible and real and helped residents give
voice to the unspeakable (Rafael 1997). Though the three
tales I describe are all documented ofﬁcially in some way,
my interest here has not been in evaluating the veracity
of residents’ claims or in using these myths to ﬁll in gaps
left by more “legitimate” sources. Nor are my readings of
these tales and their contexts the only interpretations possi-
ble. Instead, these tales offer an array of ethnographic entry
points for examining deepening collective anxieties about
migration—as a means to accumulate wealth, as crucial to
the continuation of the family and the nation, as frequently
linked to discourses of entrepreneurialism, and as governed
by increasingly exclusionary regulations. Moreover, pirogue
tales did not just reﬂect (on) the conditions of male so-
cial presence; they also transformed these conditions. The
tales themselves took on a “runaway agency,” as Lieba Faier
(2008) has aptly phrased it, shaping the behaviors, strate-
gies, and perspectives of the same actors who gave them
life and meaning. They engendered and privileged certain
forms of belonging while marginalizing or rendering invis-
ible other residents’ claims to participation, as not all men
and very few women were able to participate in these voy-
ages. But these elaborate stories also forged a postcolonial
public, one that gave nonmigrants a central role in deﬁning
the social norms, values, and expectations that governed
male migration from Senegal.

My speciﬁc focus in this article has been on how these
urban tales portrayed both pirogues (cherished symbols
of the Senegalese nation) and men (whose transnational
movements are thought to bring about the nation) as miss-
ing, vanished, or threatened. To theorize these spectacu-
lar absences, their meanings, and their effects, I draw on

Titanic tales of missing men (cid:2) American Ethnologist

Debbora Battaglia’s (1994) assertion that the act of mak-
ing an absence tangible—of regarding absence itself as a
sign, rather than as the lack of a sign—impels people to
confront fundamental questions about what it means to
be present, both temporally and physically. Foreground-
ing absence makes hyperpresent that which is displaced
or invisible, and it renders the present dubious, slippery,
unstable. Urban residents’ intense focus on missing men
and vanished pirogues drew public attention to the shift-
ing parameters of individual success and national develop-
ment as they are imagined in Dakar. The Senegalese nation,
long imagined as contingent on the transnational migration
of men, is increasingly conceptualized through neoliberal
discourses that privilege entrepreneurial risk taking and
future-oriented investment. These exigencies both collide
and merge with established (though always shifting) norms
that celebrate brotherly attachment and sacriﬁce for family
and nation. As migration becomes more difﬁcult and mas-
culine networks prove inadequate, men “invest” in clandes-
tine trips and wager their savings, their reputations, and
their lives with the hope of future prosperity—even when,
as Ousseynou is quick to note, these voyages are doomed
to fail. Pirogue tales point to the troubling predicaments of
the present: that men claim social presence through their
absence; that one seeks to overcome marginality through
participation in what is purportedly a legally and socially
“marginal” practice; that the present moment is evacuated
in favor of an imagined future; that even in their failure
to migrate, men stake some passing claim to success. The
stories were always ambivalent. They challenged the rele-
vancy of the social norms that governed individual success
and nation building at the same time that they nostalgically
reafﬁrmed these same ideals and values. They expressed
disdain for investment-oriented logics at the same time that
they narrated clandestine practices through them. Like the
spectacular mural that I describe at the beginning of this
article—whose literally black-and-white message admon-
ishes clandestine migrants at the same time that it pub-
licly afﬁrms these voyages as acts of sacriﬁce—these tales
also concretize absence, rendering otherwise invisible men
spectacularly and paradoxically present.

In this article, I have taken a cue from urban Sene-
galese, who called attention to the “missing man” as a ﬁg-
ure and a concept in need of further scrutiny and debate. In
all three tales I discuss, men, in fact, are not really “missing”
at all; yet only A¨ıda and Yaye’s tale calls explicit attention to
the ambivalent status and presence that these unsuccessful
migrants are able to claim. The two women portray clan-
destine migrants as wandering, betrayed by false promises
of wealth and status, and yet unaware of their own predica-
ment. Their tale undermines both popular and schol-
arly accounts of the impacts that migration has had on
Senegalese society, accounts that often uncritically or un-
wittingly produce men as spectacularly and productively

373

American Ethnologist

(cid:2) Volume 38 Number 2 May 2011

absent. In her work on woman-headed Afro-Caribbean
households, Blackwood (2005) is troubled by the absent
presence of a similar sort of “missing man.” She draws at-
tention to a central assumption that animates both public
perceptions and policies and anthropological theorization
of matrifocality: Matrifocal households are assumed to be
those in which men—as fathers and husbands—are absent.
Yet this assumption stands in stark contrast to actual an-
thropological ﬁndings on the dynamics of Afro-Caribbean
households, which indicate that “these families were groups
of kin and close friends that included men and were not
deﬁned by the entry or exit of a man in a heterosexual re-
lationship” (Blackwood 2005:9). Both public debates about
and anthropological theorizations of contemporary mar-
riage, Blackwood suggests, rely on the assumption that fam-
ilies, households—and, by extension, nations—are brought
about by and given meaning through male action and
presence.18 In my analysis here, therefore, I have sought
to extend Blackwood’s keen observation to consider how
both public and scholarly reﬂections on postcolonial na-
tion building and male migration constantly recenter male
movements and actions—even when these pursuits end in
failure. What comes into view as a result, I suggest, is not
some sort of reawakening of masculine solidarity born by
a sudden state of crisis but, instead, the emergence of vari-
ous gendered and classed hierarchies predicated on certain
forms of mobility. These fantastic tales of failed migration
thus oblige a critical examination of the shifting patterns of
presence and absence in places like Dakar and of our schol-
arship’s own complicity in producing “missing men.”

Notes

Acknowledgments. This research was funded by the National Sci-
ence Foundation (SES-0549003), the Fulbright-Hays Doctoral Dis-
sertation Research Abroad program, and the Department of An-
thropology at the University of California, Irvine. My greatest debt is
owed to Neha Vora, who patiently read multiple drafts and offered
keen insights that helped shape this article. I also thank Chris Dole,
Britt Halvorson, Jonathan Shapiro Anjaria, and members of the Five
College African Studies faculty for their generous feedback. Con-
versations with Moutarou Diallo during this “time of crisis” were
invaluable. I am especially grateful to my friends and informants in
Dakar whose fantastic tales, experiences, and perspectives inspired
this article. All errors and inaccuracies are my own.

1. Prior to and during colonialism, Ruﬁsque was an important
port city and trade hub, quite distinct from neighboring Dakar.
As Dakar’s population has grown and expanded, Ruﬁsque has de-
clined in importance, and it has become more like a peripheral sub-
urb (banlieue) of Dakar.

2. Prior to the 1980s, particular ethnic groups were more likely
to migrate from Senegal than others, but emigration ﬁgures today
generally reﬂect the ethnic makeup of the larger population (see
Willems 2008). Nonetheless, many urban residents with whom I
spoke saw pirogue voyages as indicative of shifts in particular eth-
nic groups’ interest and involvement in migration. For instance,
many people pointed out that the Lebu—considered to be Dakar’s

374

ﬁrst inhabitants and often ﬁshermen by trade—were historically
less likely to migrate, but they were thought to be key participants
in pirogue voyages. Urban Lebu were often recruited by “owners” of
pirogues to captain the vessels because of their presumed knowl-
edge of the sea. No ofﬁcial statistics are available that provide in-
formation on repatriated migrants’ ethnic identiﬁcation.

3. It is interesting to note that even when a different sort of
seaworthy vessel was used for clandestine migration—as becomes
clear in Souleymane’s story, recounted subsequently in the text—
it is nonetheless typically cast as a “pirogue,” probably, at least in
part, because of the cultural and historical resonances that this par-
ticular vessel provides tale tellers and audiences.

4. Daniel Mains (2007) has similarly noted that Ethiopian youth
discursively link “simply sitting” with their inability to experience
progress, to migrate, and to claim adulthood.

5. In her work on the shifting politics of marriage payments and
migrant remittances in contemporary rural Senegal, Beth Buggen-
hagen (2004) similarly notes the inﬂuence that this ﬁlm has had in
shaping notions of “love” marriage among young Wolof women.

6. Regardless of the success of a voyage, “owners” would proﬁt
from the enterprise, as the participants paid before the pirogue de-
parted. Owners used some of this money to purchase the pirogue
and outﬁt the vessel with navigation and cooking equipment, wa-
ter, and food; to gift marabouts (religious men) who prayed for
the vessel’s safety; and sometimes to make a small payment to the
captain or other staff, if this was part of the arrangement. Own-
ers themselves did not take part in the voyages, and they often re-
mained anonymous and thus were impossible to track down. I also
heard tales of “owners” who were themselves migrants living in the
diaspora, working entirely through local contacts who ran recruit-
ment efforts in their absence.

7. For more detail on the implementation of structural ad-
justment policies in Senegal, see Diop 2004 and Waterbury and
Gersovitz 1987.

8. The drastic devaluation of Senegal’s currency meant that for-
eign currencies sent home by migrants were suddenly exchanged
for double their former value, imbuing these monies with an almost
magical quality and further solidifying the role that migrants would
play in Senegal’s postadjustment economy.

9. The term alternance refers to the victory of Abdoulaye Wade
and the Senegalese Democratic Party in the 2000 presidential elec-
tions, which ended 40 years of de facto single-party rule in Senegal.
10. European Union immigration controls were also tightened
at this time, and in 2005, an EU border control organization,
Frontex—which would later be responsible for policing West
Africa’s shores, detaining clandestine migrants, and organizing
repatriations—was established.

11. Interestingly, Abdoulaye Kane (2002) argues that these in-
digenous models of saving and lending, most often led by women,
have roots in precolonial strategies for pooling resources but have
emerged more directly as a result of monetization and economic
remittance practices.

12. The notion of masculine solidarity or brotherhood that I crit-
ically examine in this article is a hybrid one and cannot simply be
equated with descriptions of the Murid tariqa and other Suﬁ or-
ders as “brotherhoods,” a translation that has come under increas-
ing scrutiny by scholars (see, e.g., Buggenhagen 2009). I found, in-
stead, that urban residents spoke both implicitly and explicitly of
brotherly connections that seemed to exceed religious ties. Some of
my informants were not, in fact, members of religious orders, and
those who were did not necessarily speak of “brotherly” relation-
ships in strictly spiritual terms. Rather, the ideas of masculine soli-
darity that many people expressed were likely shaped by a range of
local and global inﬂuences, including media and popular culture,
development policy and rhetoric, and democratization discourses.

13. Millions of faithful from around the world gather in the holy
city of Touba, an autonomous zone outside the control of the Sene-
galese state, to pray, feast, visit the mosque and other holy sites,
and socialize. Because there are no hotels and restaurants in the
city, participants must share sleeping quarters, food, and worship
space with each other. This annual pilgrimage ties up the narrow
roads that link Dakar and Touba, but friends and informants who
participated in it always insisted that the trafﬁc-clogged roads only
added to the sense of collective purpose and religious and national
solidarity that Magal inspired.

14. Various scholars who have worked more extensively with re-
turn migrants likewise describe repatriated migrants as plagued by
shame, disappointment, and frustration. See, for instance, Willems
2008.

15. Divorce is increasingly common in Dakar, but an estimated
90 percent of women who divorce remarry within ﬁve years. For
more on marriage and divorce in Dakar, see Dial 2008.

16. Aida’s new husband’s high hopes were not entirely un-
founded. A U.S. embassy ofﬁcial told me that, in extraordinary
cases, truly exemplary employees who have contributed many
years’ service at the embassy may be issued a “green card” in recog-
nition of their dedication.

17. As Achille Mbembe and Janet Roitman have pointed out in
their reﬂections on crisis in Cameroon, “Fear, and the laughter it
provokes, are often an effect of the ambiguity of lived experience:
one is subject to this violence and yet, often in spite of oneself, one
participates in its very production” (1995:351).

18. Blackwood’s assertions overlap in interesting ways with Ste-
fan Helmreich’s insistence that diaspora has been conceptualized
as a “system of kinship reckoned through men” (1992:245).

References cited

Anjaria, Ulka, and Jonathan Shapiro Anjaria

2008 Text, Genre, Society: Hindi Youth Films and Postcolonial

Desire. South Asian Popular Culture 6(2):125–140.

Babou, Cheikh Anta

2002 Brotherhood Solidarity, Education, and Migration: The Role
of the Dahiras among the Murid Muslim Community of New
York. African Affairs 101(403):151–170.

Ban´egas, Richard, and Jean-Paul Warnier

2008 Nouvelles ﬁgures de la r´eussite et du pouvoir. Politique

Africaine 82:5–23.

Barro, Issa

2008 ´Emigr´es, transferts ﬁnanciers, et cr´eation de PME dans
l’habitat. In Le S´en´egal des migrations: Mobilit´es, identities
et soci´et´es. Momar-Coumba Diop, ed. Pp. 133–152. Paris:
Karthala.

Battaglia, Debbora

1994 Retaining Reality: Some Practical Problems with Objects as

Property. Man 29(3):631–644.

Blackwood, Evelyn

2005 Wedding Bell Blues: Marriage, Missing Men, and Matrifocal

Follies. American Ethnologist 32(1):3–19.

Bouilly, Emmanuelle

2008 Les enjeux f´eminins de la migration masculine: Le collectif
des femmes pour la lutte contre l’immigration clandestine de
Thiaroye-Sur-Mer. Politique Africaine 109:16–31.

Bredeloup, Sylvie

2008 L’aventurier, une ﬁgure de la migration africaine. Cahiers

Internationaux de Sociologie 125(2):281–306.

Buggenhagen, Beth Anne

2001 Prophets and Proﬁts: Gendered and Generational Visions of

Titanic tales of missing men (cid:2) American Ethnologist

Wealth and Value in Senegalese Murid Households. Journal of
Religion in Africa 31(4):373–401.

2004 Domestic Object(ion)s: The Senegalese Murid Trade Dias-
pora and the Politics of Marriage Payments, Love, and State
Privatization. In Producing African Futures: Ritual and Repro-
duction in a Neoliberal Age. Brad Weiss, ed. Pp. 21–53. Leiden,
the Netherlands: Brill.

2009 Beyond Brotherhood: Gender, Religious Authority, and the
Global Circuits of Senegalese Muridiyya. In New Perspectives
on Islam in Senegal: Conversion, Migration, Wealth, Power,
and Femininity. Mamadou Diouf and Mara Leichtman, eds.
Pp. 189–210. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

Cameron, James, dir.

1997 Titanic. 194 min. Paramount Pictures. Hollywood.

Central Intelligence Agency

2009 The World Factbook: Senegal. Updated September 30,
https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-

2009.
factbook/geos/sg.html, accessed October 22.

Comaroff, Jean, and John Comaroff

2001 Millennial Capitalism: First Thoughts on a Second Com-
ing. In Millennial Capitalism and the Culture of Neoliberalism.
Jean Comaroff and John Comaroff, eds. Pp. 1–56. Durham, NC:
Duke University Press.

Dial, Fatou Binetou

2008 Mariage et divorce `a Dakar: Itineraires feminins. Paris:

Karthala.

Diatta, Marie Angelique, and Ndiaga Mbow

1999 Releasing the Development Potential of Return Migration:
The Case of Senegal. In Migration and Development. Reginald
Appleyard, ed. Pp. 243–266. Geneva: International Organiza-
tion for Migration and the United Nations.

Diop, Momar-Coumba, ed.

2004 Gouverner le S´en´egal: Entre ajustement structurel et

d´eveloppement durable. Paris: Karthala.

Diouf, Mamadou

2003 Engaging Postcolonial Cultures: African Youth and Public

Space. African Studies Review 46(2):1–12.

Diouf, Mamadou, and Steven Rendall

2000 The Senegalese Murid Trade Diaspora and the Making of a

Vernacular Cosmopolitanism. Public Culture 12(3):679–702.

Ebin, Victoria

1992 A la recherche de nouveaux “poisons”: Strat´egies commer-
cials mourides par temps de crise. Politique Africaine 45:86–99.

Ellis, Stephen

1989 Tuning in to Pavement Radio. African Affairs 88(352):321–

330.

Faier, Lieba

2008 Runaway Stories: The Underground Micromovements of
Filipina Oyomesan in Rural Japan. Cultural Anthropology
23(4):630–659.
Fouquet, Thomas

2008 Migrations et “glocalisation” dakaroises. In Le S´en´egal des
migrations: Mobilit´es, identities et soci´et´es. Momar-Coumba
Diop, ed. Pp. 241–276. Paris: Karthala.

Geschiere, Peter

1997 The Modernity of Witchcraft: Politics and the Occult in Post-

colonial Africa. Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia.

Helmreich, Stefan

1992 Kinship, Nation, and Paul Gilroy’s Concept of Diaspora. Di-

aspora 2(2):243–249.
Johnson-Hanks, Jennifer

2007 Women on the Market: Marriage, Consumption, and the In-
ternet in Urban Cameroon. American Ethnologist 34(4):642–
658.

375

American Ethnologist

(cid:2) Volume 38 Number 2 May 2011

Kane, Abdoulaye

Scheld, Suzanne

2002 Senegal’s Village Diaspora and the People Left Ahead. In
The Transnational Family: New European Frontiers and Global
Networks. Deborah Bryceson and Ulla Vuorela, eds. Pp. 245–
263. New York: Berg.

Larkin, Brian

2008 Signal and Noise: Media, Infrastructure, and Urban Culture

in Nigeria. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Mains, Daniel

2007 Neoliberal Times: Progress, Boredom, and Shame among
Young Men in Urban Ethiopia. American Ethnologist
34(4):659–673.
Masquelier, Adeline

2000 Of Headhunters and Cannibals: Migrancy, Labor, and Con-
sumption in the Mawri Imagination. Cultural Anthropology
15(1):84–126.

Mbembe, Achille, and Janet Roitman

1995 Figures of the Subject in Times of Crisis. Public Culture

7:323–352.

Mbodji, Mamadou

2008 Imaginaires et migrations: Le cas du S´en´egal. In Le S´en´egal
identities et soci´et´es. Momar-

des migrations: Mobilit´es,
Coumba Diop, ed. Pp. 305–319. Paris: Karthala.

Ndiaye, Oumar

2007 Avenir de la pˆeche en Afrique de l’Ouest: Des mesures
pour la sauvegarde des ressources. Le Soleil (Dakar). http://
www.lesoleil.sn/article.php3?id article=22855#, March 17.

Ndoye, Yath´e

2006 Emigration clandestine: Les s´en´egalais rallient l’Espagne
la mer. Le Quotidien. http://www.soninkara.com/

par
informations/actualites/emigration-clandestine—les-
senegalais-rallient-lespagne-par-la-mer.html, December 31.

Peterson, Kristin

2009 Phantom Epistemologies. In Fieldwork Is Not What It Used
to Be: Learning Anthropology’s Method in a Time of Transition.
James D. Faubion and George E. Marcus, eds. Pp. 37–51. Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press.

2007 Youth Cosmopolitanism: Clothing, the City and Globaliza-

tion in Dakar, Senegal. City and Society 19(2):232–253.

Smith, Daniel Jordan

2001 Ritual Killing, 419, and Fast Wealth: Inequality and the Pop-
ular Imagination in Southeastern Nigeria. American Ethnolo-
gist 28(4):803–826.

2007 A Culture of Corruption: Everyday Deception and Popular

Discontent in Nigeria. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Stoller, Paul

2002 Money Has No Smell: The Africanization of New York City.

Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Tall, Serigne Mansour

1994 Les investissements immobiliers `a Dakar des ´emigrants
s´en´egalais. Revue Europ´eene des Migrations Internationales
10(3):137–151.

2008 La migration internationale s´en´egalaise: Des recrutements
de main-d’oeuvre aux pirogues. In Le S´en´egal des migrations:
Mobilit´es, identit´es et soci´etes. Momar-Coumba Diop, ed.
Pp. 37–67. Paris: Karthala.

Tandian, Aly

2008 Des migrants s´en´egalais qualiﬁ´es en Italie: Entre regrets
et r´esignation. In Le S´en´egal des migrations: Mobilit´es, iden-
tit´es et soci´et´es. Momar-Coumba Diop, ed. Pp. 365–387. Paris:
Karthala.

Waterbury, John, and Mark Gersovitz, eds.

1987 The Political Economy of Risk and Choice in Senegal.

London: Frank Cass.

Willems, Roos

2008 Les “fous de la mer”: Les migrants clandestins du S´en´egal
aux ˆIles Canaries en 2006. In Le S´en´egal des migrations:
Mobilit´es, identit´es et soci´et´es. Momar-Coumba Diop, ed.
Pp. 277–303. Paris: Karthala.

Wittmann, Frank

2008 Politics, Religion, and the Media: The Transformation of
the Public Sphere in Senegal. Media, Culture and Society
30(4):479–494.

Rafael, Vicente L.

Zaloom, Caitlin

1997 “Your Grief Is Our Gossip”: Overseas Filipinos and Other

2004 The Productive Life of Risk. Cultural Anthropology

Spectral Presences. Public Culture 9:267–291.

R´epublique du S´en´egal Minist`ere de l’´Economie et des Finances,

Direction de la Pr´evision et de la Statistique

2004 Rapport de synth`ese de la deuxi`eme enquˆete s´en´egalaise
aupr`es des m´enages (ESAM-II). Dakar: R´epublique du S´en´egal.

Riccio, Bruno

2005 Talkin’ about Migration—Some Ethnographic Notes on
the Ambivalent Representation of Migrants in Contemporary
Senegal. Vienna Journal of African Studies 8:99–118.

Roitman, Janet

2005 Fiscal Disobedience: An Anthropology of Economic Regula-

tion in Central Africa. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

19(3):365–391.

accepted October 23, 2010
ﬁnal version submitted July 19, 2010

Caroline M. Melly
Department of Anthropology
Smith College
Tyler Annex 203
Northampton, MA 01063

cmelly@smith.edu

376

