 

Combining crop models and remote sensing 
for yield prediction:  
Concepts, applications and challenges for 
heterogeneous, smallholder environments 

 
 

Report of CCFAS-JRC Workshop 

at Joint Research Centre, Ispra, 

Italy, June 13-14,  2012 

P e t e r   H o e f s lo o t ,  A mo r   I n e s ,   
J o s   v a n   D a m ,  Gr e g o r y   D u v e il le r , 
F r a n c o is   K a y it a k ir e   a n d   J a me s   H a n s e n  
 
2 0 1 2  

Report EUR 25643 EN 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

European Commission 

Joint Research Centre 

Institute for Environment and Sustainability (IES) 

 

Contact information: 

Francois KAYITAKIRE 

Address: Joint Research Centre, Via Enrico Fermi 2749, TP 266, 21027 Ispra (VA), Italy 

E-mail: francois.kayitakire@jrc.ec.europa.eu 

Tel.: +39 0332 786580 

Fax: +39 0332 789029 

 

http://mars.jrc.ec.europa.eu/ 

http://www.jrc.ec.europa.eu/ 

 

This publication is a Technical Report by the Joint Research Centre of the European Commission and 

the CCAFS program of CGIAR. 

 

Legal Notice 

Neither the European Commission nor any person acting on behalf of the Commission 

is responsible for the use which might be made of this publication. 

 

Europe Direct is a service to help you find answers to your questions about the European Union 

Freephone number (*): 00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11 

(*) Certain mobile telephone operators do not allow access to 00 800 numbers or these calls may be billed. 

 

A great deal of additional information on the European Union is available on the Internet. 

It can be accessed through the Europa server  http://europa.eu/. 

 

JRC77375 

 

EUR 25643 EN 

 

ISBN 978-92-79-27883-9 (pdf) 

 

ISSN 1831-9424 (online) 

 

doi:10.2788/72447 

 

Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union, 20xx 

 

© European Union, 2012 

 

Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged. 

 

Printed in Luxembourg 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Combining Crop Models and Remote Sensing for 

Yield Prediction: Concepts, Applications and 
Challenges for Heterogeneous Smallholder 

Environments 

Report of Joint CCFAS-JRC Workshop 

Venue: Joint Research Centre (JRC), Ispra, Italy 

Date: June 13-14, 2012 

Peter Hoefsloot, Hoefsloot Spatial Solutions, The Netherlands 

Amor Ines, IRI-Columbia University, NY, USA 

Jos van Dam, Wageningen University, The Netherlands 

Gregory Duveiller, Joint Research Centre, Ispra, Italy 

Francois Kayitakire, Joint Research Centre, Ispra, Italy 

James Hansen, CCAFS & IRI-Columbia University, NY, USA 

 

 

November 2012 

 

 

 

2 

 

Contents 

1 

Executive summary ............................................................................................................................... 5 

1.1 

Context .......................................................................................................................................... 5 

1.2  Workshop rationale and objectives .............................................................................................. 5 

1.3  Workshop salient findings............................................................................................................. 6 

2 

Summary of presentations and discussions .......................................................................................... 9 

2.1 

2.2 

2.3 

2.4 

2.5 

2.6 

2.7 

2.8 

2.9 

Data assimilation techniques ........................................................................................................ 9 

Crops researched ........................................................................................................................ 10 

Use of Crop Models ..................................................................................................................... 11 

Use of Remote Sensing parameters as proxies for biomass production .................................... 13 

Use of satellite sensors ............................................................................................................... 15 

Research locations ...................................................................................................................... 16 

Spatial scales ............................................................................................................................... 17 

Heterogeneity ............................................................................................................................. 17 

Crop masks .................................................................................................................................. 18 

2.10  Crop management factors .......................................................................................................... 18 

2.11  Uncertainty of predictions .......................................................................................................... 19 

2.12 

Linkage with other sources of information ................................................................................. 19 

3 

Presentation Abstracts ........................................................................................................................ 21 

3.1 

3.2 

3.3 

The challenges of an operational crop yield forecasting system in Sub-Saharan Africa ............ 21 

Crop Forecasting within the CCAFS Program .............................................................................. 23 

Integration of agro-hydrological modelling, remote sensing and geographical information .... 24 

Assimilating remote sensing data into crop models improves predictive performance for 

3.4 
spatial application ................................................................................................................................... 25 

3.5 
Regional Crop Simulation Modelling for Yield Prediction Using Remote Sensing and GIS: Indian 
Experiences ............................................................................................................................................. 26 

3.6 

3.7 

3.8 

3.9 

 

Integration of MODIS products and a crop simulation model for crop yield estimation ........... 27 

Exploring the Response of the Central US Agro-Ecosystem to Climate Change ......................... 28 

Crop Yield Forecasting Over Various Scales Combining Models and Remote Sensing ............... 29 

On the Assimilation of Remote Sensing Data with Crop Models for Crop Yield Forecasting ..... 30 

3 

Simultaneous Estimation of Model State Variables and Observation and Forecast Biases using a 
3.10 
Two-Stage Hybrid Kalman Filter ............................................................................................................. 31 

3.11 

Satellite image simulations for data assimilation at multiple scales .......................................... 32 

3.12  MARS operational crop monitoring and yield forecasting activities in Europe .......................... 33 

3.13 

Experiences with data assimilation for regional crop yield forecasting ..................................... 34 

3.14  Crop Monitoring and Early Warning Service in Africa ................................................................ 35 

3.15  Data Assimilation based on the Integration of Satellite Data and Field Sensor Data for Drought 
Monitoring .............................................................................................................................................. 36 

3.16  Data assimilation for the carbon cycle in Sudan savannah smallholder communities ............... 37 

Soil-water-crop modelling for decision support in Sub-Saharan west Africa: experiences from 

3.17 
Niger and Benin ....................................................................................................................................... 38 

3.18  Wheat yield modelling in a stochastic framework within and post season yield estimation in 
Tunisia 39 

4 

5 

References .......................................................................................................................................... 41 

Acronyms and Abbreviations .............................................................................................................. 43 

6  Workshop Program ............................................................................................................................. 45 

Participants ......................................................................................................................................... 47 

Sponsors .............................................................................................................................................. 48 

 

4 

7 

8 

 

 

 

1  Executive summary 

1.1  Context 
 

There are many factors contributing to the strain on the world’s food supply, ranging from insufficient 
investment in the agricultural sector, a lack of access to markets, climate change and climate variability, 
water shortages and drought, to simple increased demand for food and changes in diet.  

It is a major challenge for the world to feed its growing population. It can easily be seen that agriculture 
is a key to this challenge. Given the world’s environmental problems, simply growing more food is not 
enough. Agriculture will have to be developed with sustainability built-in from the start. 

One of the important  subjects in agriculture is crop yield forecasting.    It’s advent began in the 1970s. 
Crop yield forecasting is key for government structures at all levels, including NGO’s and international 
organization  such  as  the  United  Nations  as  well  as  companies  that  are  dependent  on  agricultural 
produce  as  an  input.  Research  in  crop  yield  forecasting  has  seen  advancements  in  response  to 
widespread  famine  in  the  Sahel,  Ethiopia  and  other  countries  in  the  seventies  and  eighties.  The 
operational knowledge gained helped predict and partly avoid food shortages in the years after. 

The target environments for crop yield forecasting have always been two-fold. In countries with highly 
mechanised large-scale agriculture, such as the USA, Europe and Russia, crop yield forecasting provides 
data  to  governmental  structures,  companies  and  farmers.  Good  yield  and  price  predictions  provide  a 
clear strategic advantage. Governments and supra-national bodies (such as the EU) use these data for 
rationalisation of policy adjustments. 

The other crop forecasting arena is formed by developing countries, where low staple food production 
can  have  disastrous  effects.  Predicting  food  shortages  in  developing  countries  early  has  been  the 
mandate of the crop forecasting units of UN organisations such as FAO and WFP, as well as FEWSNET, 
JRC and a number of others. 

The technical methodology supporting the two operational sectors is largely comparable,  although an 
important  difference  lies  in  the  type  of  agriculture  studied,  distinguishing  homogenous  large-scale 
production environments from heterogeneous, smallholder environments. 

 

1.2  Workshop rationale and objectives 
 

Predictions  of  crop  yields within  the  growing  season  are  critical  inputs  for  a  range  of  agricultural  and 
food security decisions.  For example, management of agricultural input and credit supplies, agricultural 
trade, food security safety net and relief programs, agricultural insurance, and recommendations about 
crop  varieties  and  production  technologies  depend  on  or  benefit  from  the  best  possible  estimates  of 

 

5 

crop production.   They differ  primarily  in the timing of key actions and hence  the  required lead-time.  
Agricultural and food security management can generally benefit from improvements in accuracy (at a 
given lead-time) and lead-time (at a given threshold of accuracy).   

Both simple water balance and process-based crop models are often used to estimate yields within the 
growing  season.    In  some  cases,  they  are  coupled  with  seasonal  climate  forecasts  to  reduce  the 
uncertainty  associated  with  climate.  The  uncertainties  associated  with  crop  models,  input  data  and 
modelling assumptions – collectively referred to as model error – also contribute to the uncertainty of 
crop  yield  forecasts.  One  way  to  correct  crop  model  errors  is  by  data  assimilation.    Data  assimilation 
involves  using  observed  data  to  update  simulated  model  state  variables  or  to  estimate  model 
parameters. Evidence in the literature suggests that data assimilation can improve model performance. 
Remote sensing (RS) by satellites offers several options for reducing crop forecasting errors, particularly 
in data-sparse regions. Biophysical variables retrieved from remote sensing data, such as Leaf Area Index 
(LAI),  soil moisture  and  ET,  obtained  at  adequate  spatial  and  temporal  resolutions,  can  potentially  be 
coupled with crop models to provide valuable information for crop yield forecasting at various scales. 
However, heterogeneous, smallholder farming environments present significant challenges for the use 
of  remote  sensing  data  assimilation  for  crop  yield  forecasting,  as  field  size  within  these  highly 
fragmented  landscapes  is often  smaller  than  the  pixel  size  of  remote  sensing  products  that  are  freely 
available.  

JRC and CCAFS jointly sponsored the workshop on June 13-14, 2012, at the JRC in Ispra, Italy, to identify 
avenues for exploiting remote sensing information to improving crop forecasting in smallholder farming 
environments. The workshop’s objectives were: 

  To advance the state-of-knowledge of data assimilation for crop yield forecasting; 
  To address challenges and needs for successful applications of data assimilation in forecasting crop 

yields in heterogeneous, smallholder environments; and  

  To enhance collaboration and exchange of knowledge among data assimilation and crop forecasting 

groups.  

The  workshop  succeeded  in  bringing  together  scientists  from  around  the  world.  This  has  enabled 
discussions on research and results and has greatly enhanced collaboration and exchange of knowledge, 
especially about data assimilation and crop forecasting. 

 

1.3  Workshop salient findings 
 

This  workshop  was  organized  to  exchange  knowledge  on  crop  models  and  remote  sensing  for  yield 
prediction,  especially  for  heterogeneous,  smallholder  environments.  Organisations  such  as  JRC  and 
various  UN  organisations  are  interested  in  progress  in  crop  modelling,  as  it  helps  to  improve  their 
operational  yield  forecasting.  From  an  operational  viewpoint  Francois  Kayitakire  of  the  EU  Joint 
Research Centre sets the most pressing challenges as follows: 

 

6 

  Advanced  remote  sensing  and  modelling  techniques  have  not  yet  reached  operational  real-time 

crop forecasting. 

  So far, the spatial resolution of models and feasible remote sensing is hardly adequate for most of 

cropping systems in Africa. 

  About the timing of crop yield forecasting: for operational circumstances it would be  best to have 
good crop forecasts about two months before harvest, although it might be more realistic to have it 
one month before. 
In smallholder environments, it is still unknown which crops are grown and when. 

 

The  workshop  shows  that  there  have  been  clear  advances  in  crop  yield  forecasting.  Important 
innovations were made in the use of remote sensing-crop model integration through data assimilation. 
In essence  data assimilation  is the technique  whereby remote sensing data are used as inputs  in crop 
models, to adjust or reset state variables in crop models. Several techniques exist to do this of which the 
Ensemble Kalman Filter is applied most. 

The most noticeable advances have been made in homogenous environments. Good examples of these 
cropping  environments  were  presented  for  the  mid-western  states  of  the  USA  and  Russia.  For  these 
environments, scientists showed that the solution lies in the use of high-resolution remote sensing data 
integrated with advanced crop models. Some of this research has reached practical applicability. As an 
example, grain yields can be forecasted using high resolution remote sensing fed into a crop model and 
subsequently checked against combine harvester data. 

This  is  not  (yet)  feasible  in  an  African  setting.  For  these  environments,  low-cost  moderate  resolution 
imagery  is  more  feasible,  combined  with  increased  knowledge  on  extracting  signatures  for  targeted 
crops  and  cropping  systems.  In  the  workshop  in-depth  research  has  been  presented  on  smallholder 
environments in Africa and Asia based on the study of carbon, water and energy cycles. It was showed 
that  the  heterogeneous,  smallholder  cropping  environment  is  slowly  being  understood  in  satisfactory 
detail. Incorporation of other  data  (e.g. socio-economic data)  proved to be  needed to understand the 
crop production to its full extent. 

For  smallholder  environments,  some  participants  advocated  the  use  of  high-resolution  techniques, 
coupled with an in-depth knowledge of the area of study. Promising field experiments are being set up 
in Mali, Niger, India and other countries to study the heterogeneous, smallholder environments. Others 
felt  that  (for  country  of  continental  scale  predictions)  low-resolution  techniques  (remote  sensing, 
models and data) are the way to go forward.  

CCAFS theme 2 main goals are to build resilient rural livelihoods, ensure food delivery, trade, and crisis 
response  and  enhanced  climate  information  and  services.  Assisting  scientists  in  the  field  of  crop 
forecasting is one of the ways to achieve these goals. During the workshop Jim Hansen (Theme 2 leader) 
of CCAFS led the discussion on how to address the challenges for applying RS data assimilation for crop 
forecasting in heterogeneous, smallholder environments. With respect to data, high resolution remote 
sensing was offered (to the m scale) but seems to be unfeasible for operational use in Africa because of 
scale  and  cost.  Moderate  resolution  remote  sensing  combined  with  downscaling  techniques  e.g.,  un-

 

7 

mixing  vegetation  signature  seems  to  be  interesting,  like  what  is  being  pursued  by  IRI/JPL.  Fusion  of 
moderate  (shorter  return  period)  and  high  resolution  (longer  return  period)  remote  sensing  was  also 
discussed  with  some  reluctance  from  the  group.    In  terms  of  data  integration,  the  state-parameter 
simultaneous update within the Ensemble Kalman Filter was discouraged especially when using LAI for 
data  assimilation.  A  framework  was  proposed  in  which  crop  model  parameters  first  are  estimated  by 
inverse modelling, and then the calibrated model can be linked with the Ensemble Kalman Filter for the 
assimilation of LAI for forecasting yield. Proof of concept study was discussed using data from India and 
Mali. 

 

 

 

8 

2  Summary of presentations and discussions 

 

During the workshop, crop production has been highlighted from many sides, using a variety of models, 
satellite  parameters  and  field  data.  Subjects  range  from  field  to  continent  level,  from  small  scale  to 
large-scale  crop  production,  from  tropical  to  temperate  regions,  from  maize  to  millet.  With  the  large 
variety of presented subjects, it is difficult to honour each and every subject in this summary report. 

However, trends in crop yield forecasting for heterogeneous, smallholder environments can certainly be 
observed. Some of the trends and observations discussed in the following pages: 

  Data assimilation techniques 
  Crops researched 
  Use of Crop Models 
  Use of Remote Sensing parameters as proxies for biomass production 
  Use of satellite sensors 
  Research locations 
  Spatial scales (from field to continent) 
  Heterogeneity 
  Crop masks 
  Crop management factors 
  Uncertainty of predictions 
 

Linkage with other sources of information 

Although the presenters covered a wide range of subjects, the analysis of the presentations has led to 
some conclusions that are summarized in the following sections. 

 

2.1  Data assimilation techniques 
 

During  the  workshop  it  has  been  shown  that  data  assimilation  can  be  applied  successfully  in  crop 
modelling  studies.  In  general  two  types  of  assimilation  techniques  were  demonstrated  in  the 
presentations: 

1.  A recalibration strategy where some uncertain model parameters (for example the emergence date) 

are optimized by minimizing the difference between the model and the observations available.  

2.  A  sequential  updating  strategy  where  model  states  or  parameters  are  updated  during  the  model 
run.  A  prerequisite  for  this  technique  is  that  the model  allows  adjusting  the  states  or  parameters 
during the model run. Essentially in data assimilation, model parameters in a time-step are re-set or 
corrected by observations from the real world.  

 

9 

For crop modelling a logical source of these observations is remote sensing. Remotely sensed data are 
typically sensor data gained from platforms such as satellites, aircraft and surface-bound sensors.  

In data assimilation, one could simply replace the model results by observations. In practice this is not a 
good idea, because: 

  Both the external data and the model results contain errors; 
  Often a proxy of the state variables is assimilated; 
  Almost always one needs to update many (unobserved) state variables using only one or a couple of 

observations; and 

  Continuity of the observations is not guaranteed (cloud cover, satellite failure). 

Therefore  methods  like  the  Ensembles  Kalman  filter  have  to  be  applied  (Pauwels)  or  re-calibration  of 
model parameters are better options for data assimilation. 

Presenters argued that data assimilation in crop growth related models has its challenges: 

  The studied processes and models have biases that are not taken care of in some of the algorithms 
that support data assimilation. Working with biases is often possible by applying corrections for bias 
to the original algorithms (Pauwels). 

  A  parallel  process to  biomass  production,  or  crop  growth,  is  crop  development  (phenology  of  the 
plant). When trying to assimilate a remote-sensing estimation of biomass in a crop growth model, 
one may be faced by what some authors call a “phenological shift” (see Curnel et al. 2011). Basically, 
a given amount of green biomass may be attained at different stages of the crop season, e.g. in the 
increasing  or  the  decreasing  part  of  the  curve,  and forcing  this  biomass value  in  a  model without 
knowing the phenology can result in dramatically wrong results.  
It  is  still  unclear  which  combination  of  satellite  data  and  crop  modelling  (input  data;  calibration; 
assimilation)  is  most  effective.  It  needs  to  be  studied  which  crop  data  are  most  suitable  for  data 
assimilation at available temporal and spatial scales of satellite images (van Dam) 
Interaction/dependency between parameters may lead to errors in their estimation (Guerif) 

 

 

 

2.2  Crops researched 
 

The table below shows that most of the research in this workshop is done on Maize and Wheat. Both 
crops  are  among  the  most  cultivated  in  the  world  (grown  in  tropical  as  well  as  areas  with  temperate 
climates), which could explain part of the popularity. Furthermore, these crops are often grown in large 
fields on large farms with advanced crop management practices like precision farming (Bach), leading to 
a nicely homogenous crop. 

Of the pure tropical crops, rice, sorghum and millet are mentioned most (Table 1). Especially millet and 
sorghum are grown in the heterogeneous, smallholder environments that are subject of this workshop. 

 

10 

Millet and sorghum are often grown as landraces. Even within a cropped field a large variety of heights, 
phenology  and  production  exists.  For  farmers  this  might  have  an  advantage,  as  they  seem  to  aim  for 
minimizing  risks  rather  than  maximizing  production  (Akponikpe).  It  does,  however,  make  research  for 
these corps challenging. 

Table 1. Names of crops mentioned in the presentations 

Crop 
Maize 
Wheat 
Rice 
Soybean 
Sorghum 
Sugar beet 
Millet 
Cereals 
Pulses 
Tubers 

 

No. of Presentations 
11 
10 
5 
5 
5 
3 
3 
2 
1 
1 

Total Occurrences 
56 
46 
61 
34 
17 
22 
13 
3 
1 
1 

A distinction has been made between C4 crops like maize and C3 crops like wheat and rice. As the C4 
crops have a slightly different photosynthetic cycle, their reaction on radiation, CO2 content and other 
environmental parameters proved to be different (Drewry). 

 

2.3  Use of Crop Models 
 

It is interesting to see which crop models are used most often in research presented. Both statistical and 
dynamic/mechanistic crop modelling has been used in the workshop. 

The models SWAP/WOFOST and DSSAT were most popular among scientists presenting in this workshop 
(Table 2).  

The  SWAP/WOFOST  model  (Soil,  Water,  Atmosphere  and  Plant)  simulates  vertical  transport  of  water, 
solutes  and  heat  in  unsaturated/saturated  soils.  The  program  is  designed  to  simulate  the  transport 
processes  at  field  scale  level  and  during  entire  growing  seasons.  SWAP  is  open-source  and  can  be 
downloaded here: http://www.swap.alterra.nl/. SWAP incorporates WOFOST, which is also used stand-
alone. 
  A  standalone  version  of  WOFOST  and  derived  models  can  be  downloaded  from 
http://www.wageningenur.nl/wofost  other  Wageningen  models  can  be  downloaded 
from 
http://models.pps.wur.nl.   

The  Decision  Support  System  for  Agrotechnology  Transfer  (DSSAT)  is  a  software  application  program 
that comprises crop simulation models for over 28 crops. The crop simulation models in DSSAT simulate 

 

11 

growth, development and yield as a function of the soil-plant-atmosphere dynamics. Although DSSAT is 
not open source, its source code and executables can be requested for free from http://www.dssat.net/ 

Some  models  are  developed  by  the  presenting  scientists  themselves  and  not  distributed  to  other 
groups.  These  models  are  often  used  in  precision  agriculture  for  direct  advice  to  farmers  (APSIM, 
http://www.apsim.info). 

Table2. Use of models in workshop presentations 

No. of Presentations 
Models 
3 
SWAP 
3 
DSSAT 
3 
CSM 
3 
WOFOST 
1 
PROMET 
1 
MM5 
1 
WTGROWS 
1 
STICS 
1 
MODFLOW 
1 
SUCROS 
1 
ORYZA1 
1 
LINGRA 
1 
WARM 
PROSAIL 
1 
AGROMETSHELL  1 
1 
APSIM 
MLCan 
1 

 

Total Occurrences 
18 
14 
14 
8 
27 
11 
9 
6 
3 
3 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 

The models described in the workshop describe crop biomass production roughly through the study of 3 
processes:  water  cycle  (water  balance  models),  energy  cycle  (radiative  transfer  models)  and  carbon 
cycle. Many models take two or more of these processes into account. 

Plant growth models are relatively good in simulating the potential growth, as affected by climate and 
crop characteristics (Figure 1).  

Also  the  growth  inhibiting  effects  of  water  shortage,  oxygen  shortage,  salinity  excess  and  nutrient 
shortage can be simulated quite well with current crop growth models. However, the growth reduction 
due  to weeds,  pests,  diseases  and  pollutants  is  still  difficult  to  simulate.  Satellites  measure  the  actual 
growth  conditions,  which  includes  the  total  effect  of  all  growth  reducing  factors.  This  may  cause  a 
mismatch between crop growth simulations and measured crop growth by satellites. 

Scientists increasingly use “model inversion” whereby the model is fed with output parameters to get a 
better understanding of the driving input variables/properties (Honda, Guerif and Sehgal). 

 

12 

Figure 1. Plant growth simulation is affected by defining climate and crop characteristics (potential 

growth), limiting factors and reducing factors. All factors together result in actual growth. 

 

 

2.4  Use of Remote Sensing parameters as proxies for biomass production 
 

Proxies  for  yield  and  biomass  production  have  been  developed  over  the  years  from  remote  sensing 
derived  spectral  measurements.  The  products  involve  different  spectral  bands,  various  retrieval 
algorithms and corrections. The most popular products (in terms of occurrence in the presentations of 
this workshop) are mentioned in Table 3. 

No. of presentations 

Table 3. Occurrence of parameters and proxies in the presentations  
Parameters/Proxy 
LAI & GAI 
(Leaf Area Index & Green Area Index) 
NDVI (Normalized Difference 
Vegetation Index) 
Evapotranspiration 
Precipitation derived from RS 
fAPAR (fraction of Absorbed 
Photosynthetically Active Radiation) 
IR (infrared) 
EVI (Enhanced vegetation Index) 
Global Radiation 

11 

9 
8 
5 

4 
2 
1 
1 

 

 

13 

Total Occurrences 

177 

83 
26 
8 

31 
3 
8 
3 

PotentialActualdefining factors•CO2•radiation•temperature•crop characteristicsphysiology, phenologycanopy architecturedefining factors+limiting factors•water shortage•oxygen shortage•salinity excess•nutrient shortagedefining factors+limiting factors+reducing factors•weeds•pests•diseases•pollutantsThe parameters above can be extracted from a variety of satellite platforms. In practice, MODIS, SPOT, 
NOAA-AVHRR  and  MSG  are  often  used.  The  parameters  have  been  used  at  low,  medium  and  high 
resolutions at various scales. 

The  most  frequently  used  parameter  is  LAI  (Leaf  Area  Index).  This  parameter  has  been  developed  50 
years ago for field experiments.   It’s defined as half the total developed area of green leaves per unit of 
ground  horizontal  area  (Chen  &  Black,  1992).  The  satellite-based  LAI  products  are  generally  not  the 
same variables as the LAI in crop growth models or the LAI measured in a field. A main reason for this 
discrepancy  is  that  available  satellite  LAI  are  produced  from  reflectance  obtained  from  coarse  spatial 
resolution pixels, in which various different types of vegetation covers are present. For the same reason, 
several scientists have  proven that  the  satellite based LAI can differ considerably  from field measured 
LAI  (Honda).  Sometimes  LAI  is  referred  to  as  GAI  (for  Green  Area  Index).  For  several  crops  in  which 
various part of the plant photosynthesis (e.g. cereals), it is actually more appropriate to use this term to 
refer  to  the  biophysical  variable  retrieved  from  remote  sensing  since  the  radiance  measured  by  the 
instrument is made of electromagnetic radiation reflected from all plant organs (Duveiller et al., 2011a). 

A  biophysical  variable  that  is  generally  as  widely  available  as  LAI  is  the  fraction  of  Absorbed 
Photosynthetically Active Radiation (fAPAR). This variable is actually more closely related to yield than 
LAI. For diverse reasons (one being that fAPAR is generally not a state variable in the current generation 
of  simulation  models)  it  seems  to  be  much  less  popular  for  data  assimilation  in  crop  models,  even 
though  it  probably  avoids  some  of  the  problems/uncertainties  encountered  with  LAI.  This  point  was 
raised in the workshop and proposed as a justified research direction. 

The  NDVI  (Normalized  Difference  Vegetation  Index)  has  been  used  widely.  This  parameter  has  been 
around for quite some time and long historical records exist. Many derivatives/refinements of NDVI are 
now  in  use  such  as  DVI  (Difference  Vegetation  Index)  and  EVI  (Enhanced  Vegetation  Index;  used  by 
Hoogenboom). 

An  estimate  of  actual  evapotranspiration  can  be  based  on  satellite  signals  only.  Crop  models  often 
calculate actual evapotranspiration as output. While the first method is based on evapotranspiration of 
the entire vegetation by pixel, the second approach makes it possible to be crop-specific. Examples of 
both approaches were shown. 

An issue that returned various times in the discussions was which model variables should be updated at 
satellite overpass. For instance, if LAI is measured, not only the LAI but also many other model variables 
that are related to leaf area index (such as plant biomass, green area index, development stage) should 
be updated. The plant model update should be consistent. Various groups use different methods. 

Satellite  derived precipitation  estimates are used in crop forecasting, but  it has been proven that this 
parameter is related poorly to yields when applied as cumulative over the crop period (Irénikatché). As 
input to crop models at a daily or dekadal time-step it has however proven its usefulness.  

 

 

14 

2.5  Use of satellite sensors 
 

For data assimilation, satellite based parameters are widely used in combination with crop models. See 
below a table of the satellites mentioned by the presenters in the workshop where satellite names and 
sensor names  are mixed. Of the  satellites/sensors listed below,  data from Landsat,  NOAA AVHRR, EO, 
Terra (Aster and MODIS), Aqua (MODIS) and Envisat (MERIS and ASAR) are available free of charge (van 
Dam).  

Table 4. The use of satellites and sensors 

Platform 
Terra and Aqua 
SPOT 
SPOT 
NOAA  
LANDSAT 
MSG (METEOSAT) 
Sentinel (still to be 
launched) 
RapidEye 
Envisat/MERIS 
Quickbird 
TRMM 

 

Sensor 
MODIS 
VEGETATION 
HRG/HRV/HRVIR 
AVHRR 
TM/ETM 
 
OLCI 

 
MERIS 
 
 

No. of Presentations 
9 
5 
2 
5 
4 
2 

Total Occurrences 
30 
10 
4 
6 
7 
6 

2 
1 
1 
1 
1 

2 
2 
2 
2 
2 

The  MODIS  sensors  are  mentioned  most  frequently.  MODIS  (Moderate  Resolution 
Imaging 
Spectroradiometer)  is  an  instrument  aboard  the  Terra  (EOS  AM)  and  Aqua  (EOS  PM)  satellites.  Terra 
MODIS and Aqua MODIS are viewing the entire Earth's surface every 1 to 2 days, acquiring data in 36 
spectral bands. MODIS is widely used because its products are free, easily available for download, and 
some  more  elaborated  products  such  as  LAI  and  FAPAR  are  distributed  along  the  usual  spectral 
reflectances and indices.   

Although with the higher level products such as LAI a wide range of corrections have been applied, some 
researchers  report  that  these  products  have  to  be  used  with  care  and  do  not  always  align  with  the 
situation  on  the  ground  (Honda;  van  Dam).  This  is  in  part  due  to  lack  of  adequacy  between  the 
observation  support  (i.e.  where  satellite  data  was  collected)  and  the  field  size  which  is  visited  on  the 
ground. 

A  tentative  movement  away  from  optical  sensors  to  radar  sensors  has  been  noted.  Radar  penetrates 
clouds  and  is  therefore  less  susceptible  to  atmospheric  disturbances  (Bakary).  However,  the  passive 
radar sensors generally have a low resolution, and in general radar signals are still a challenge to use. 

 

15 

Many  low-resolution  satellite  data  are  available  at  high  frequency,  while  high  resolution  data  are 
available at low frequency. Various algorithms exist to combine low and high-resolution data to derive 
the optimal amount of information (Ines; Honda). 

Besides satellite sensors, some scientists use earth-bound sensors on poles as well as small, unmanned 
airplanes (Drewry, Honda). 

 

2.6  Research locations 
 

Most of the research presented has been conducted in Africa, with the country of Niger at the top of the 
list  (Table  5).  Niger  occurs  33  times  in  4  presentations  (Akponikpe,  Traoré,  Bakary,  Hansen).  Other 
African countries the presenters mentioned were Senegal, Mali, Sudan and Burkina. Little research from 
English speaking African countries has been presented with the exception of Kenya and Ghana. 

Table 5. Names of countries, regions and states in all presentations 
Country 
Niger 
Senegal 
Mali 
Europe 
Sudan 
USA 
Belgium 
Netherlands 
Burkina 
Ethiopia 
Nepal 
Ghana 
Kenya 
France 
Thailand 
Egypt 
Japan 
Tunisia 
Armenia 
Iberian 
Tanzania 
Uganda 

No. of Presentations 
4 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
2 
2 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 

Total Occurrences 
33 
15 
10 
8 
7 
7 
6 
6 
5 
4 
4 
4 
2 
9 
4 
3 
3 
3 
2 
1 
1 
1 

 

 

16 

Quite some research findings were presented on European countries, mainly The Netherlands, Belgium, 
Germany, the Iberian Peninsula and Russia. The mid-western states of the United States were frequently 
used as research locations. These states have an advantage over other study areas due to their relatively 
homogenous  crop  covers  during  the  cropping  season.  This  enables  the  scientists  to  find  “almost  pure 
pixels” in remote sensing imagery. 

 

2.7  Spatial scales 
 

The  spatial  scale  of  the  research  matters  for  the  methods  and  data  that  can  be  applied  successfully. 
Studies were presented at a wide range of spatial scales, ranging from field to continent. A somewhat 
arbitrary list of scales mentioned: 

  Field level (van Dam and Bach, Drewry, Akponikpe) 
  Village level (Traoré, Akponikpe) 
  District level (Seghal, Bakary, Guerif) 
  Country level (Marinho, Meroni) 
  Sub-continent and continent level (Duveiller and Terink) 

Some  debate  was  noticeable  among  the  scientist  on  the  question whether  methods  at  the  finer  level 
(e.g. field) can successfully be scaled up to any level above. While some argued that it is just a matter of 
computing  power,  others  insisted  that  different  models  and  datasets  have  to  be  applied  at  different 
spatial scales.  

In  general,  it  became  apparent  that  research  at  the  field  level  helps  to  understand  complex  cropping 
systems and leads to better inputs and management techniques on farm level while research on district 
and higher scales helps policy makers in governments, NGO’s and international organisations. Ideally a 
methodology should be developed which addresses both field and regional scale, as for instance shown 
by Bach. 

 

2.8  Heterogeneity 
 

One of the most challenging aspects of the use of remote sensing proved to be the heterogeneity of the 
crop/vegetation  in  one  pixel.  This  is  most  apparent  in  low-resolution  imagery  (e.g.  >  1  km  pixel  size). 
“Pure  pixels”  for  low-resolution  imagery  can  be  found  in  the  USA  and  Russia,  but  are  almost  non-
existent  in  Africa  and  Europe  minus  Russia.  Some  recent  research  has  shown,  however,  that  pure 
enough  pixels  can  be  obtained  in  highly  fragmented  landscapes  in  Europe  in  order  to  have  a  crop 
specific signal (de Wit) if medium spatial resolution imagery such as MODIS (250m) is employed and the 
spatial response of the instrument is carefully taken into account (Duveiller et al. 2011b). This approach 

 

17 

allows  an  alternative  solution  to  un-mixing  coarse  pixels,  but  on  the  other  hand  still  requires  some  a 
priori information of where the crops are located beforehand. 

High-resolution  imagery  proved  to  be  helpful  to  detect  in-field  variability  on  large-scale  farms  (Bach). 
This  kind  of  high  spatial  resolution  imagery  is  typically  available  only  for  a  limited  geographic  extend, 
and with a temporal revisit capacity which is lower than desired for agricultural monitoring. Although, 
future  satellite  constellations  (such  as  the  European  Spatial  Agency’s  Sentinel-2)  aim  at  making  high 
spatial resolution imagery operationally available worldwide, there remains the challenge of managing 
this exorbitant amount of data and extract from it a clear and reliable information than can be used for 
assessing crop status. 

In heterogeneous, smallholder environments, even high resolution imagery had to be complemented by 
extensive field research to successfully describe the heterogeneity of fields and crops (Traoré). 

 

2.9  Crop masks 
 

Several researchers noted the lack of good crop masks (Marinho, Kayitakire). Unfortunately, land cover 
maps  just  specify  agricultural  practices  (arable  land,  rangeland  etc.),  and  rarely  go  down  to  the  crop 
level. For many areas, such crop masks should ideally be done on a yearly basis to reflect the changes 
that  occur  due  to  crop  rotation  or  expansion/regression  of  crop  extends.  Crop  rotation  is  the  main 
limitation  in  Europe  that  forces  the  operational  MARS  crop  yield  forecasting  system  of  the  European 
Commission from using crop specific time series (Duveiller). 

Another  challenge  is  that  crop  masks  cannot  be  considered  constant  as  different  crops  are  grown  in 
different years. Even percentage-wise pixel estimates (for example 20% wheat, 30% maize etc.) are only 
available for some well-researched areas. 

Researchers  generally  put  quite  some  work  into  crop  masks,  before  the  actual  research  topic  was 
investigated (Traoré, Hoogenboom). 

 

2.10 Crop management factors 
 

Crop  yields  are  to  a  high  degree  determined  by  the  management  practices  applied  to  it  (Sehgal).  For 
crop  yield  forecasting  the  most  important  ones  are  sowing  dates,  irrigation  and  nutrient  application. 
Crop model outcome is to a high degree dependent on sowing date (Traoré). 

Participants showed several methods to estimate sowing dates: 

  Simulated sowing date, based on external parameters (Akponikpe); 

 

18 

  Estimated sowing dates extracted from remote sensing time series (Guerif); 
  Establishing sowing dates through field work (Sehgal) or local sensors in fields (Honda). 

Obviously the scale of the study (from field to continent) determines the possibilities. At higher scales 
(country, continent), fieldwork is not a workable solution to determine management factors applied. 

 

2.11 Uncertainty of predictions 
 

Uncertainty in crop yield predictions remains a problem. This is particularly the case early in the season. 
Generally the uncertainty declines towards the end of the season. Uncertainty during the season can be 
lowered through seasonal climate forecasts (Hansen).  

Model  uncertainty  can  partly  be  addressed  by  data assimilation  techniques,  while  climate  uncertainty 
can be addressed by seasonal forecasts (Ines). 

 

2.12 Linkage with other sources of information 
 

It  has  been  advocated  during  the  workshop  that  scientists  look  at  linkages  with  information  sources 
outside  the  traditional  soil-water-plant  system.  Social  economic  databases  and  other  sources  that 
explain small-scale farmers livelihoods from a different angle are to be integrated with crop models for a 
better  understanding  of  crop  production  systems.  Potentially  this  could  go  further  than  establishing 
simple correlations. Models integrating for example socio economic information with crop production 
systems are yet to be developed (Guerif). 

The  recent  AgMIP  project  combines  climate,  crops  and  economics  (Traoré).    Within  AgMIP  a  large 
number  of  crop  and  agronomy  modelling  groups  cooperate  to  compare  modelling  results  for  existing 
crop datasets and for future conditions, including climate change. 
 

 

 

19 

 

 

 

20 

3  Presentation Abstracts 

 

3.1  The challenges of an operational crop yield forecasting system in Sub-

Saharan Africa 
Francois Kayitakire, JRC, MARS Unit, FOODSEC Action, Ispra, Italy 

The Food Security Assessment (FOODSEC) Action of the EC-JRC supports the implementation of EU Food 
Security  and  Food  Assistance  policies  by  providing  scientific  advice  and  objective  assessment  of  food 
security situation. It has been developing pieces of an early warning system to monitor crop and pasture 
production, with a focus on most food insecure areas, mainly in Sub-Saharan Africa. The system was by 
large conceived as an extension of the “Monitoring Agriculture with Remote Sensing” (MARS) project to 
regions  outside  the  European  Union.  Thus,  it  relies  mainly  on  remote  sensing  solutions  and  to  some 
extent on crop modelling. Low-spatial satellite imagery is extensively used to derive the crop conditions 
in  agricultural  areas  and  pasture  availability  in  pastoral  areas.  This  approach  proved  effective  for 
qualitative  assessment  of proxies  of  food  production.  In  a  few  cases,  tentative  to  link  remote  sensing 
derived  indicators  to  crop  yield  or  production  has  been  done.  Those  indicators  are  usually  analysed 
together with those derived from meteorological data, and they make the basis of the MARS crop and 
food security monitoring reports (http://mars.jrc.ec.europa.eu/mars/Bulletins-Publications). 

Crop modelling has up-to now played a minor role in the system for several reasons. The main constraint 
has  been  the  model  calibration  and  the  availability  of  historical  yield  (and  production)  statistics.  The 
area of interest of the FOODSEC Action is actually very large, with many different ecological conditions 
and agricultural systems that are poorly understood and mapped. Moreover, yield statistics that are a 
key component in any crop forecasting solution are rarely available at the appropriate spatial resolution 
and  temporal  coverage.  Therefore,  JRC  opted  for  a  simple  crop  model  (AgrometShell)  that  was 
developed by FAO. For instance, it has been used to forecast maize production in Kenya by regressing 
yield  to  two  variables  derived  from  the  AgrometShell 
model:  actual  evapotranspiration  (ETA)  and  water 
requirement satisfaction index (WRSI) (see graph, Rojas 
2007).  

Building from this experience, JRC, in collaboration with 
Alterra  (Netherlands)  implemented  the  core  of  the 
AgrometShell  while  customizing  some  modules  and 
introducing  a  number  of  improvements  in  the  input 
data (soil data, crop masks, etc.) to build an application 
that will help to easily provide analysts with the WRSI at 
the  global  level.  That  is  the  Global  Water  Satisfaction 
Index  (GWSI)  application  (available  online  through  the 
MARS Viewer: http://www.marsop.info/marsop3/).  

 

21 

However,  there’s  a  need  of  an  effective  quantitative  crop  yield  forecasting  solution.  Crop  forecasting 
only makes sense when the conclusions can be published in time. In an ideal case, the forecast of crop 
production is released 2 months before harvest. It is more realistic to expect estimates 1 month before 
harvest,  but  also  an  analysis  that  comes  in  at  harvest  time  is  still  practical.  The  forecasting  method 
should also be  able to correctly  capture the inter-annual variability of yield because  such variability is 
the most critical for food security of vulnerable households. 

A crop forecasting system based on crop modelling and remote sensing faces a number of challenges:  
 

 

 

 

 

the availability of yield data at sub-national levels; 
the calibration and validation of models; 
the availability of long time series in input data; 
the course spatial resolution of input data, such as remote sensing. This spatial resolution is hardly 
adequate for most of cropping systems in Africa (mixture of crop fields and other land cover types); 
the necessity to know where crops are grown (crop masks).  

 
To address  these  challenges  will  require  long-term  research  and  developments.  But  there’s  perhaps a 
room  for  searching  for  simpler  solutions  with  a  reasonable  accuracy.  This  workshop  provided  some 
directions to such solutions. 

 

22 

3.2  Crop Forecasting within the CCAFS Program 

James Hansen, Theme 2 Leader of the Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security research 
program of the CGIAR. 

The  CGIAR  research  program  on  Climate  Change,  Agriculture  and  Food  Security  (CCAFS)  is  a  major 
research  initiative  that  aims  to:    identify  and  develop  pro-poor  adaptation  and  mitigation  practices, 
technologies  and  policies  for  agriculture  and  food  systems;  and  support  the  inclusion  of  agricultural 
issues in climate change policies, and of climate issues in agricultural policies, at all levels.  CCAFS work is 
organized in 4 research themes: 

  Theme 1: Adaptation to Progressive Climate Change 
  Theme 2: Adaptation through Managing Climate Risk (led by James Hansen) 
  Theme 3: Pro-poor Climate Change Mitigation 
  Theme 4: Integration for Decision Making 

Theme  2 seeks  to enhance  the  resilience of rural livelihoods and food systems to climate-related risk.  
Improving climate-related information for risk management, across multiple scales, is an important part 
of  the  Theme’s  contribution  toward  climate-resilience.  CCAFS  research  currently  focuses  on  East  and 
West Africa and South Asia. 

influences 
needed,  most 

A number of agricultural and food security decisions 
depend  on  the  best  possible  estimates  of  the 
impacts of climate fluctuations on crops.   While the 
decision 
timing  of 
the 
information 
climate-sensitive 
decisions can benefit  from increasing accuracy (at  a 
given  lead  time)  or  lead  time  (at  a  given  accuracy 
threshold).  The  uncertainty  of  a  crop  forecast 
climate  uncertainty  and  model 
consists  of 
uncertainty 
(encompassing 
non-climatic 
uncertainties).  Total uncertainty diminishes, and the 
contribution  of  model  uncertainty  increases,  as  the 
season  progresses  (see  graph).  Climate  uncertainty 
in weather can be reduced by seasonal forecasts.  Typically the greatest positive impact on uncertainty 
occurs  early  in  the  season  (Hansen  et  al.,  2006).  Options  for  reducing  model  uncertainty  include 
improving  models,  improving  input  data  and  parameters,  and  data  assimilation  techniques.    These 
techniques show the greatest benefit later in the season.  

calendar 

all 

CCAFS  contributions  to  crop  forecasting  methodology  and  capacity  include:  reconstructing  historic 
meteorological  inputs,  integrating  seasonal  climate forecasts  into  crop  forecasts,  remote  sensing  data 
assimilation,  and  software  platform  development.    However,  understanding  and  fostering  the  use  of 
that information for decision-making is a particular emphasis. 

 

 

23 

3.3  Integration of agro-hydrological modelling, remote sensing and 

geographical information  
Jos van Dam, Department of Environmental Science, Wageningen University, The Netherlands 

For  many  years  Wageningen  University  has  been  in  the  forefront  of  crop  modelling  leading  to  well-
known crop models as WOFOST, SUCROS and LINTUL. Many of these models can be downloaded from 
http://models.pps.wur.nl. These models have  been developed from a thorough understanding of crop 
production,  down  to  the  role  of  leaf  stomata.  The  agrohydrological  model  SWAP  (Soil  Water 
Atmosphere Plant) combines the crop growth model WOFOST with a detailed soil transport model. The 
graph below visualizes the processes modelled by SWAP. 

several 

has 
Wageningen  University 
conducted 
research 
projects  in  India  (Sirsa)  and  Iran 
(Esfahan)  with 
local  partners 
with  the  aim  to  gain  knowledge 
of  local  cropping  systems,  study 
the  water  cycle  and  look  for 
ways  to  aggregate  results  from 
field  to  region.  The  projects 
started  with  data  collection 
(both  field  data  and  remote 
sensing  data).  The  data  have 
been  input  to  the  crop  model 
A 
SWAP 
comparison  is  made  between  the  crop  models  run  with  and  without  input  of  remote  sensing  data 
through data assimilation.  

and  WOFOST. 

In  the  uncorrected  SWAP  model,  the  simulated  LAI  was  larger  than  satellite  measured  LAI.  The  main 
reasons are the difference in scale between model and satellite as well as the fixed harvesting data in 
the  model.  The  model  also  showed  larger  fluctuations  than  the  satellite  data,  which  was  also 
contributed to a spatial and temporal scale effect. 

As a second track, remote sensing parameters have been used to reset state variables in the model. The 
assimilation of satellite-based LAI measurements was most effective. This significantly reduced the bias 
percentages for predictions one month in advance of harvest. However, bias percentages for predictions 
two months ahead of harvest were not influenced positively by assimilation with LAI (Vazifedoust et al., 
2009). In the near future, Wageningen University intends to apply these methodologies at common sites 
in Mali and India.  

 

 

24 

3.4  Assimilating remote sensing data into crop models improves predictive 

performance for spatial application 
Martine Guerif, UMR EMMAH INRA UAPV, Avignon, France 

Crop  models  are  powerful  tools  for  dealing  with  agro-environmental  issues  such  as  the  impact  of 
agriculture on soil and water, the impact  of agriculture on climate  change,  the  evaluation of cropping 
systems. Models can help with strategic and tactic decisions for sustainable cropping systems. Models 
can be applied at different scales: field/farm, region, country and continent. 

For  the  use 
in  data  assimilation  the  following 
parameters can be obtained from three sensor types 
(solar, TIT and µ-wave). The number of plusses on the 
figure indicates the applicability level. 

INRA  uses  the  crop  model  STICS,  which  has  a  daily 
time-step.  Its  main  aim  is  to  simulate  the  effects  of 
the physical medium and crop management schedule 
variations on crop production and environment at the 
field scale.  

With  STICS, 
techniques have been applied: 

three 

types  of  data  assimilation 

  Forcing  of  observed  variables  into  the  model  when  the  model  doesn’t  simulate  this  variable  

(or when the model accepts to replace the simulated value by a prescribed one); 

  Sequential  correction  of  model  predictions.    Observations  and  predictions  at  the  preceding  times 

are considered in the model to produce the prediction for the next time step; 

  Model  inversion.  Observations  are  used  in  order  to  estimate  parameters  and/or  initial  conditions 

considered as difficult to estimate and sensitive. 

These algorithms have been applied in a number of experiments in France and India on sugar beet and 
wheat.  The  conclusions  are  that  remote  sensing  data  assimilation  into  crop  models  can  improve 
significantly the predictions of crop models (Varella et al., 2010).  

Further  research  work  is  needed  to  determine  the  most  favourable  observation  configurations  to 
estimate  parameters  as  well  as  finding  the  right  combinations  of  different  types  of  RS  observations. 
INRA  has  great  expectations  for  data  availability  in  the  future  with  a  better  temporal  and  spatial 
resolution (e.g. Sentinel constellation).  

 

 

 

25 

SolarTIRµ-waveLeaf area index++++++fAPAR+++Cover fraction+++++chlorophyll content+++water content++temperature+++moisture+++roughness+++organic matter++residues++Canopy structureLeaf characteristicsSoil characteristicsBIOPHYSICAL VARIABLES3.5  Regional Crop Simulation Modelling for Yield Prediction Using Remote 

Sensing and GIS: Indian Experiences 
Vinay Sehgal, Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi, India 

IARI is a 106 years old national institute in agricultural research & teaching in India, instrumental in the 
“Green revolution” as well as the first national institute to introduce Remote Sensing in courses. Remote 
Sensing (RS) can be of use for crop simulation models at regional scale. It may provide inputs parameters 
and/or initial conditions as well as improve the accuracy of the model results. This positive effect of data 
assimilation techniques is due to correction of errors in the structure of the model and the correction of 
the growth affecting factors like pests, diseases, salinity etc. This can be  done by making models self-
correcting as well as inserting RS measurements directly into the model as state variables. 

Data assimilation algorithms used at IARI: 

  Direct use of the driving RS variable in model; 
  Forcing: updating of a state variable derived from RS (e.g. LAI); 
  Re-initialization:  adjustment  of  an  initial  condition  to  obtain  a  simulation  in  agreement  with  RS 

derived observations; 

  Re-calibration: adjustment of the model parameters to obtain a simulation in line with RS; 
  Corrective method: error between simulated and RS derived variable to correct yield values. 

In the study area of Thanjavur MODIS LAI images are used in the ORYZA1 model (a model for irrigated 
rice production) to get an estimate of the phenological stage of different rice classes. 

In  another  study  the  WTGROWS  model  is  applied  with  the  forcing  and  re-initialization  techniques  to 
estimate wheat  grain  yields  at  farmer  field  level.  Grain  yield  estimations  improved  considerably  using 
this approach.  

In India, conventionally, crop forecasting is done by Crop Cutting Experiments (CCE) following a sampling 
plan that varies from state to state, and the results are then aggregated at higher administrative units. 
Recent research initiatives have improved crop forecasting in India, namely: 

  FASAL 

(Forecasting  Agricultural  Output  Using  Space,  Agrometeorology  and  Land-based 
Observations). FASAL forecasts  different  crops using  different  remote  sensing data combined with 
field data. 

  NADAMS (National Agricultural Drought Assessment & Monitoring System). NADAMS uses seasonal 

NDVI profiles integrated with ground information to estimate crop conditions. 

Main findings (Sehgal et al., 2011): 

  Crop models need to describe at least three interdependent systems: canopy, root and soil system. 
  Crop management practices are the main determinant of variability in crop yields at small scale. 
  Remote  sensing  derived  crop  phenology  (sowing),  LAI  and  soil  moisture  assimilations  at  multiple 

time in crop season are a possible way forward. 

 

 

26 

3.6  Integration of MODIS products and a crop simulation model for crop yield 

estimation 
Gerrit Hoogenboom, Washington State University, Prosser, WA, USA, in collaboration with 
Hongliang Fang, Institute of Geographic Sciences and Natural Resources Research, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, and Shunlin Liang, University of Maryland, College Park 
Maryland, USA. 

Washington State University, in cooperation with various international partners has developed various 
methodologies  for  crop  yield  estimation  with  remotely  sensed  data.  The  data  assimilation  techniques 
used were: 

  Direct input: the model uses remotely sensed data as inputs 
  Sequential  assimilation: replace state variables in the model with remotely sensed data 
  Variational  assimilation:  minimize  the  difference  between  variables  estimated  by  remote 

sensing and crop model simulations 

Crop models used were: 

  DSSAT (Decision Support System for Agro-technology Transfer) 
  CSM-CERES-Maize and CSM-CERES-Wheat for maize/corn and wheat 
  CSM-CROPGRO-Soybean for soybean 

In the scenarios 5 different remotely sensed datasets were tested for data assimilation into the models 
above: LAI , EVI (enhanced vegetation index), NDVI, EVI & LAI and NDVI & LAI, all derived from MODIS 
imagery. In the various models these data were used to adjust planting date, planting population, row 
spacing and fertilization date and amount. These methods were applied on a regional scale for the state 
of Indiana in the United States (Fang et al., 2011). These studies  showed that regional crop yields can 
successfully  be  estimated  with  the  data  assimilation  approach,  whereby  the  combination  of  LAI  and 
NDVI  performed  best  against  measured  USD  NASS  corn  yield  data.  Furthermore,  a  method  was 
developed to aggregate the individual maize yields to county level. See maps below. 

The  conclusions  are  that  MODIS  products  are 
useful for crop yield estimation at the regional 
scale. Field hydrological conditions can also be 
simulated successfully with this approach. The 
methodology could be improved if new remote 
sensing products (e.g., crop percentage at 250 
meter grid size) would become available. 

 

27 

 

3.7  Exploring the Response of the Central US Agro-Ecosystem to Climate 

Change 
Darren Drewry, NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory / Caltech Climate Physics Group, Pasadena, CA, 
USA 

Rapid changes  in the  earth atmosphere  have  been detected in the last hundred years. This applies to 
carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide and sulphur. At the same time scale, global warming has been 
detected with an average increase of about 1 degree Celsius. A relation between the two phenomena is 
plausible. 

An  assumption  is  often  made  that  higher  CO2  levels  lead  to  higher  plant  production,  as  one  of  the 
growth factors is available at  a higher  rates. However, some  scientists  doubt  this, as plants  appear to 
close  the  stomata  under  influence  of  elevated  CO2  levels.  A  Free  Air  Carbon  Enrichment  (FACE) 
experiment has been conducted to find evidence 
of this effect (see photo). 

Field  experiments  have  been  done  with  maize 
(C4)  and  soybean  (C3)  whereby  CO2  levels  in  the 
crop  were  elevated  with  a  ring  tube  providing 
field.  For  these 
extra  CO2  directly 
in  the 
experiments,  a  multi-layer 
canopy-root-soil 
system  model  (MLCan)  capable  of  accurately 
predicting  canopy-atmosphere  exchange  of  CO2 
has been set up. PAR, NIR, LW, U, Ta and Ea were 
measured from a tower construction in the field. 

The  CO2  application  causes  higher  temperatures  inside  the  maize  canopy.  Furthermore,  in  soybean,  a 
10%  higher  LAI  was  observed  related  to  an  increase  in  photosynthetic  substrate.  In  soybean,  the 
stomata were  recorded to have  a more  closed state. In maize these effects were not found, although 
some ecophysiological acclimation was recorded. Regarding the canopy responses to elevated CO2 the 
following conclusions were drawn (Drewry et al., 2010): 

  Modelled  gas  exchange  and  leaf  state  responses  to  elevated  CO2  are  in  good  agreement  with 

SoyFACE observations for both C3 and C4 crops (soybean and maize); 

  Net  canopy  CO2,  latent  energy  and  sensible  heat  were  increased  by  24%,  decreased  by  5%  and 
increased by 37% at mid-day for soybean.  Structural acclimation & increase in substrate availability 
offset much of the effect that would have otherwise occurred;  

  Net  canopy  CO2,  latent  energy  and  sensible  heat  were  increased  by  1.5%,  decreased  by  16%  and 

increased by 47% at mid-day for corn;   

  Structural  acclimation  results  in  greater  shortwave  energy  absorption  in  light-saturated  upper-

canopy; 
In both crops there is a negligible impact of carbon enrichment on carbon uptake. 

 

 

28 

3.8  Crop Yield Forecasting Over Various Scales Combining Models and 

Remote Sensing 
Wilco Terink, FutureWater, Wageningen, Netherlands 

Crop  growth models  can  be  applied  at  various  scales  ranging  from  field  to  basin  and  country  to  even 
continent.  Some  models  are  more  suitable  to  be 
applied at field scale, while other models are more 
suitable  to  be  applied  at  the  basin  or  continental 
scale. 
(agro)hydrological 
simulation  models  that  are  in  the  opensource 
domain. 
FutureWater 
determines  which  model  is  most  suitable,  given 
the  spatial  and  temporal  scales  at  hand  (see 
graphic). 

FutureWater 

uses 

For 

each 

project, 

 

An important aspect is formed by the trade-off between the physical model detail (model complexity) 
and  the  availability  of  the  required  data.  As 
expected,  field  scale models  have  generally  more 
physical  detail  than  continental  models,  where 
input  data  are  usually 
scarce  and  more 
assumptions have to be made. Similarly, in remote 
sensing,  stratification 
is  possible,  based  on 
temporal  frequency  and  spatial  resolution  (see 
graphic).  

FutureWater conducts projects at various scales as 
mentioned  above. 
it  evaluated  the 
(agro)hydrological  performance  of  an  farm-level 
(field  scale)  irrigation  improvement  project..  In  India  the  company  calibrated  at  the  basin  scale  a 
hydrological model with remotely  sensed evapotranspiration (Immerzeel and Droogers, 2008). For 
the  22  countries  in  the  Middle  East  and  North  Africa  (MENA  region),  FutureWater  performed  a 
water supply and demand analysis for the period 2010-2050. 

In  Egypt 

In every project choices have to be made again. The selection of models and data is determined by: 

  The trade-off between required resolution, available resolution, and costs 
  High resolution inputs are almost always needed for calibration and correcting 

Regarding remote sensing data there is a movement from optical to radar based imagery in order to be 
able to look through clouds. 

 

 

29 

3.9  On the Assimilation of Remote Sensing Data with Crop Models for Crop 

Yield Forecasting 
Amor Ines, International Research Institute for Climate and Society (IRI), Palisades, NY, USA 

Uncertainty  is  one  of  the  largest  challenges  when  predicting  crop  yields.  This  uncertainty  can  be 
attributed to both models and climate data. Uncertainty is highest early in the crop cycle and generally 
diminishes  towards  the  harvest.  Model  uncertainty  can  be  lowered  partly  by  data  assimilation 
techniques,  while  climate  uncertainty  can  be  decreased  by  using  seasonal  climate  forecasts,  (e.g.  as 
produced by IRI). Although seasonal forecasts have a low temporal and spatial scale, they have proven 
to be useful in projects like the WFP Africa Risk Capacity project to reduce the uncertainty a few months 
before  harvest.  See  example  of  the  scale  of  the  seasonal 
forecasts in map. 

crop  models  work  best 

large-scale, 
Generally 
homogeneous  agro-ecosystems.  However,  for  complex, 
in  the  context  of 
heterogeneous  agricultural  systems 
smallholder  agriculture 
the  
fractions of target crops grown are usually small.  

in 

in  developing  countries, 

Innovations are especially needed in: 

  Un-mixing  RS  vegetation  signature,  which  should 
result in signals for different crops rather than a mixture  of 
crops and natural vegetation; 

  Promising RS soil moisture data are available (based 
on  radar),  but  the  scale  is  still  too  coarse  (both  spatial  and 
temporal) for most modelling applications.  

Crop  monitoring  and  yield 
forecasting  have  been 
investigated  for  the  continental  United  States  (especially 
Georgia  and  Iowa)  using  DSSAT-CSM  crop models  in  combination  with  soil moisture  and  LAI  products 
from  remote  sensing.  Using  AMSR-E  soil  moisture  data  with  the  Kalman  filter,  did  not  lead  to 
significantly  better  results,  while  the  use  of MODIS  LAI  did  have  a  positive  effect  on  accuracy of yield 
data against USDA yield figures. 

Conclusions of research are (Ines et al., 2012): 

  Regarding the Ensembles Kalman filter performance applied to DSSAT-CSM crop models, the value 

of data assimilation with climate forecasts is more evident later in the growing season. 
  The skills of climate forecasts is most important in the early part of the growing season. 
  The  availability of  downscaled  remotely  sensed  soil  moisture  and  LAI  data  would  make  modelling 

considerably more accurate. 

  Using both soil moisture + LAI gave better results compared to using them independently in the data 

assimilation - possibly due to the interaction of the two in the simulations. 

 

 

30 

3.10 Simultaneous Estimation of Model State Variables and Observation and 

Forecast Biases using a Two-Stage Hybrid Kalman Filter 
Valentijn R.N. Pauwels, Laboratory of Hydrology and Water Management, Ghent University, 
Ghent, Belgium 

In Earth sciences data assimilation is defined as the updating of modelled state variables using external 
datasets. Therefore, in theory, one could simply replace model results by observations. In practice this is 
not a good approach because: 

  Both the external data and the model results contain errors. 
  Many times a proxy of the state variables is assimilated, and not the state variable itself 
  Almost always one needs to update many (unobserved) state variables using only one or a couple of 

observations. 

Therefore more complicated methods for data assimilation are developed of which the most popular is 
the Kalman filter. In the original Kalman Filter (1960), the state variables and observations are assumed 
to be  unbiased. It uses  a model state-space  representation of the system whereby the state  variables 
are mapped onto observation space. 

In  an  example  with  soil  moisture,  the  modelled  soil  moisture  is  expressed  as  a  volumetric  fraction 
(between 0 and 1). The fact that the observations are in percentages shows that state variables can be 
updated  using  any  observation  they  are  related  to.  In  this  approach,  the  “Kalman  Gain”  becomes  a 
weighting factor between the observation error and the model error. 

The  Kalman  filter  has  been  designed  for  linear,  un-biased  systems.  Unfortunately  many  data  sets 
(especially  remote  sensing  data)  assimilated  into  hydrologic  models  contain  a  significant  bias.  Many 
studies  remove  the  bias  before  the  assimilation  by  removing  the  long-term  difference  between  the 
model and the external data. Since models contain bias as well, this may not be the optimal strategy. 

Therefore a refinement of the Kalman filter has been developed by Evensen (1994), which is called the 
Ensemble  Kalman  Filter.  It  enables  the  assimilation  of  external  data  into  nonlinear  biased  systems.  It 
essentially  estimates  forecast  and  observation  biases  together  with  the  model  state.  An  essential 
assumption is that the observation and forecast bias errors are independent of each other and are also 
independent of the system state errors. 

Crop  models  tend  to  very  complicated  (many  processes  combined  in  one  model),  and  need  a  wide 
variety of data sets, model parameters, and meteorological  forcing. This can lead to both random and 
systematic errors in the model results.  

Unfortunately,  straightforward  application  of  data  assimilation  techniques  leads  to  both  random  and 
systematic errors. Therefore, if bias is apparent in observations and/or model, this has to be taken into 
account to get meaningful model outputs (Pauwels and De Lannoy, 2009). 

 

 

 

31 

3.11 Satellite image simulations for data assimilation at multiple scales 

Heike Bach, VISTA Remote Sensing in Geosciences, Munich, Germany 

VISTA Remote Sensing is a private company (SME) situated in Munich, Germany (www.vista-geo.de). Its 
main  expertise  is  in  remote  sensing  applications  in  hydrology  and  agriculture.  Vista  works  in  close 
connection with the University of Munich with the aim to bring (crop) science to practice. For farmers, 
Vista develops satellite techniques for precision farming in Europe and Russia (www.talkingfields.de). 

PROMET (Mauser & Bach 2009) and SLC (Verhoef & Bach 2012) are land surface models that couple a 
crop  growth  model  with  a  radiative  transfer  model  offering  simulated  satellite  images  that  can  be 
compared  to  real  ones  for  data  assimilation  purposes.  SLC  uses  structural,  spectral  and  observational 
input  data.  PROMET  is  raster-based,  and  produces  a  completely  closed  water  and  energy  balance. 
Management practices such as sowing date and harvest date can be fed onto the system.  

On  a  field  scale,  PROMET/SLC  has  been  used  to 
predict  wheat  yields  in  a  large-scale  farm  in 
Germany,  producing  high  resolution  (20  m) 
output,  which  fit  very  well  with  measurements 
from  combine  harvester  recordings  (see  graphic 
from Hank et al., 2012). 

(76000 

In  a  meso-scale  study  encompassing  the  Upper 
Danube  Watershed 
surface 
temperatures  were  calculated  with PROMET  that 
correlated  very  well  to  similar  NOAA-AVHRR 
extracted temperature data at a resolution of 1 by 
1 km.   

km²) 

In  a  macro-scale  study  for  Central  Europe  (1.36 
million  km²)  the  MM5  model  (model  to  simulate 
or predict atmospheric circulation) was combined 
with PROMET, where the 45km pixels of the MM5 
model were successfully combined with the 1 km PROMET model to deliver an estimate for the average 
annual evapotranspiration (Zabel et al. 2012).   

The  above-presented  examples  show  that  high  resolution  satellite  images  now  allow  observing  the 
current crop status at various scales. The heterogeneities of the land surface can thus be captured. By 
assimilation  of  satellite  data,  improved  modelling  of  the  water  and  carbon  cycle  can  be  achieved. 
PROMET is capable of predicting crop yields at field scale, meso-scale and even macro-scale using the 
same physical principles and procedures. 

 

 

 

 

32 

3.12 MARS operational crop monitoring and yield forecasting activities in 

Europe 
Gregory Duveiller, AGRI4CAST Action, MARS Unit, JRC, Ispra, Italy 

The  European  Commission  requires  in-season  crop  yield  forecasts  at  a  European  level  as  part  of  the 
decision making process on market intervention and for policy support. For the past twenty years, the 
Monitoring Agricultural Resources (MARS) Unit of the European Commission Joint Research Centre (JRC) 
has  operationally  produced  such  forecasts  for  European  member  states  and  for  countries  in  the  EU 
periphery  in  a  tight  monthly  schedule.  This  is  done  using  the  MARS  Crop  Yield  Forecasting  System 
(MCYFS), a modelling infrastructure driven by agro-meteorological data and assisted by remotely sensed 
observations. The MCYFS is a decision support system driven by expert knowledge and relying on four 
main data infrastructures: a meteorological data infrastructure, a remote sensing data infrastructure, a 
crop  simulation  infrastructure  and  a  statistical  infrastructure.  The  system  uses  meteorological  data  to 
run  crop  growth  models  that  provide  information  on  crop  status,  such  as  biomass  production,  soil 
moisture  or  biomass  of  the  storage  organs.  Remote  sensing  provides  an  independent  assessment  of 
crop status through the use of global and pan-European low-resolution imagery in near real-time (NRT). 
Finally, the statistical infrastructure includes methods used to analyse, along the season, historical yield 
records against the information about crop status generated by crop models to produce a forecast that 
is presented in a monthly bulletin to decision-makers in Brussels. Of course, the team of analysts that 
needs  to  decide  what  is  the 
most  adequate  information 
to  base  the  forecast  upon  is 
the 
this 
approach,  and  is  supported 
by  a  skilled  IT  team.  The 
system  is  articulated  by  a 
spatial  framework  defining 
the  spatial  reference  upon 
which 
is 
generated  (reference  grids, 
administrative  units,  static 
spatial  layers  used  by  crop 
models  and  remote  sensing, 
etc.). 

the  data 

all 

keystone 

of 

Some research questions that are currently being investigated or that are foreseen in the coming future 
include  the following: (1) using remote sensing  to provide  improved crop calendars which could help 
recalibrate  models  better  in  the  crop  modelling  infrastructure;  (2)  develop  a  method  to  identify  pure 
enough  crop  specific  time  series  from  MODIS  that  can  be  used  from  crop  growth  monitoring;  (3) 
exploiting  global  solar  radiation  LANSAF  products  (derived  from  MSG)  as  input  to  the  crop  models  to 
produce simulations of better quality. 

 

 

33 

3.13 Experiences with data assimilation for regional crop yield forecasting 

Allard de Wit, Alterra, Wageningen, The Netherlands 

The  result  of  a  study  investigating  whether  data  assimilation  techniques  could  improve  regional  crop 
yield forecasting for Europe was presented. A study area was selected in the Walloon area of Belgium 
and  in  Northern  France.  In  this  area  wheat  is  a  dominant  crop.  The  WOFOST  crop  yield  model  was 
applied on these areas on a 10x10 km grid scale. The methodology involved the identification of “pure” 
wheat  pixels  (see  graphics)  using  LAI  temporal  profiles.  MODIS  GAI  ingestion  was  used  for  selected 
wheat pixels for the years 2000 to 2009. 

The  research  involved  heavy  quality  control  on  MODIS  GAI  after  which  the  GAI  data  were  applied  in 
WOFOST  using  parameter  optimization.  Finally  results  were  validated  with  the  EUROSTAT  regional 
statistics. 

Ensembles 

Limitations  to  the  use  of  the 
Kalman 
data 
assimilation 
technique  were 
found.  As  EnKF  originates  from 
meteorology  and  oceanography 
(Evensen 1994) it works best with 
integration  of  rates  of  change 
atmospheric 
according 
physics/hydrodynamics. 
However,  crop  models  have  two 
processes  running:  growth  and 
phenology.  Phenology  can  be 
seen  as  a  parallel  controlling 
process 
the 
that  complicated 
application of the EnKF filter. 

to 

The main conclusions of the research are (de Wit et al., 2012):  

  The  Ensemble  Kalman  filter  must  be  applied  with  care.  It  proved  to  be  suitable  for  soil  moisture 

assimilation, where there is no phenology effect. 

  The data assimilation recalibration strategy seems more suitable in general for assimilating canopy 

variables although crop-specific estimates are needed (no mixed pixels). 

  MODIS  GAI  estimates  have  shown  to  be  very  noisy  in  W-Europe,  as  a  result  of  the  high  level  of 

landscape fragmentation.  Post-processing and quality control are very important. 

  MODIS GAI estimates have demonstrated to be useful in updating crop model parameters. One of 
the  findings  was  that  the  inter-annual  variability  in  the  distributions  of  the  optimized  model 
parameters was larger than expected. 

 

 

 

34 

3.14 Crop Monitoring and Early Warning Service in Africa 

Bakary Djaby, University of Liege, Arlon, Belgium 

University  of  Liege  (ULg)  plays  an  important  role  in  the  GMFS  (Global  Monitoring  for  Food  Security) 
project,  funded  by  the  European  Space  Agency  (see  www.gmfs.info).  The  main  partners  in  Africa  are 
located in Sudan, Malawi and Niger (AGHRYMET). 

The ULg aims at improving early warning services with quantitative estimates of crop yield and pasture 
biomass in two regions: 

  West  Africa:  Development  of  crop  yields  forecast  models  using  remote  sensing  data  in  Niger  and 

Senegal; 

  East  Africa  and  West  Africa:  improvement  of  Livestock  Early  Warning  systems  products  in  West 

Africa (Niger and Senegal) and East Africa (Ethiopia) 

In  GMFS  Phase  2,  the  focus  of  the  project  has  been  on  intensive  training  of  users  in  Africa,  and  the 
integration of model results into the countries food security bulletins. The model used is the FAO Crop 
specific soil water balance model (CSSWB), which has been implemented in the software AgrometShell. 

Input data differ from application to application, but in general these datasets are used: 

  Rainfall estimates from stations and ECMWF era interim reanalysis data 
  Remote sensing NOAA-AVHRR GAC, SPOT and MERIS imagery (NDVI, Fapar and DMP) 
 
  National Statistics for production data 

Land use data: LULC/ Globcover and FAO crop calendars. 

Remote  Sensing  data  are  used  to  assess  the  seasonality  (sowing,  harvest).  For  this,  time  series  are 
analyzed  with  the  adaptive  Savitzky-Golay  filtering  method.  From  this  fitted  model  the  beginning  and 
end of the growing season can be extracted. In a next step, these data are input into the water balance 
calculations. 

For  validation  extensive  field  surveys  have  been  conducted  in  Niger  and  Senegal  for  5  years.  In  Niger 
18343 fields with millet, 8548 fields with sorghum and 1791 fields with maize In Senegal 3122 fields with 
millet and 2743 fields with peanuts. The models are validated by leaving part of the input data out of the 
calculations and check calculated values against input data later.  If little data are available leave-one-
out cross validation techniques are used as well as resampling (bootstrap). 

Some  difficulties  were  experienced  with  the  accuracy  of  climate  information,  e.g.  ECMWF  versus 
country station data and uncertainties in land use and country statistical figures.  

Developments planned in the near future: 

Integration of SAR soil moisture data; 

 
  Two forecast periods in Niger and Senegal for this season (August and September); 
  Comparative study of USGS WRSI input versus AgrometShell Water balance and impact. 

 

35 

3.15 Data Assimilation based on the Integration of Satellite Data and Field 

Sensor Data for Drought Monitoring 
Kiyoshi Honda, Int’l Digital Earth Applied Science Research, Center (IDEAS), Chubu Institute for 
Advanced Studies, Chubu University, Japan 

Chubu University develops methods for crop model calibration based on the Integration of satellite data 
and  field  sensor  data.  In  an  effort  to  standardize  and  have  systems  communicate  easily,  cloud-based 

web services have been developed to dissimilate field sensor data. 

The Field sensor network cloudSense is based on small and low-cost sensors 
that provide data through mobile Internet communication. Potentially these 
sensors  can  gather  information  in  real-time  from  anywhere  in  the  world. 
Possible  applications  are:  disaster  preparedness,  agriculture, 
logistics, 
security, etc.  

As the sensor network is essentially open source, anyone can add a sensor to 
the network. A simple protocol based on an input form needs to be filled in 

order to add the sensor to the network. 

For  analysis  and  visualisation,  applications  are  developed  for  mobile  phones  and  various  computer 
operating systems. One of the applications aims at fostering confidence in food safety among consumers 
It  essentially  displays  crop  information  to end  users  of  the  crop, while  the  crop  is  still on  the  field.  In 
another application greenhouse gasses (CH4 and N2O) are measured and visualised in Thailand. Sensors 
are fitted onto fixed poles as well as low-cost helicopters and other AUV’s. 

Remote sensing data can be used in crop models through data assimilation. However, remote sensing 
generally  provides  just  a  few  parameters  such  as  LAI,  Eta  etc.  Important  parameters  such  as  soil 
hydraulic parameters, sowing date etc. are difficult to base on satellites. Field sensor data fill this gap. As 
an example, in Thailand, rice is frequently damaged by dry spells. The damage is assessed in real-time by 
running  the  SWAP  model  assimilated  with  remote  sensing  and  field  sensor  data.  This  research  has 
shown that low October rainfall has the highest adverse impact on rice production. 

Field  Sensor  data  have  been  successfully  used  to  correct  MODIS  LAI  data,  as  MODIS  LAI  generally 
underestimates  the  LAI  on  the  ground.  The  satellite  LAI  was  calibrated  with  ground  measurements 
before it was used in the assimilation process. 

Measured  soil  moisture  information  is  very  valuable  as  assimilated  input  into  crop  models.  As  this 
cannot be done with satellite measurements, a ground sensor network is proven to be very helpful. 

Generally low-resolution satellite data are available at a high frequency, while high-resolution data are 
available  at  low  frequency.  With  an  algorithm  developed  at  Chubu  University,  both  sources  can  be 
combined into a more valuable source of data. As an example, high resolutions LANDSAT / ASTER data 
have successfully been combined with low resolution AVHRR / MODIS data (Ines and Honda, 2005). 

 

36 

3.16 Data assimilation for the carbon cycle in Sudan savannah smallholder 

communities 
Pierre Traoré, ICRISAT, Bamako, Mali 

Stable soil organic carbon (SOC) plays an important role in soils while it retains water and improves the 
structure  of  the  soil.  Increasing  SOC  contents  in  the  soil  could  also  potentially  help  reduce  the  CO2 
content  of  the  air.  These  are  long-term  processes  prove  difficult  to  quantify.  ICRISAT  took  up  the 
challenge and used the DSSAT model (DSSAT-CENTURY) together with field measurements and remote 
sensing to quantify the carbon cycle.  

This was applied in Sudanian agricultural systems in Southern Mali, Burkina Faso and Ghana (see map). 
These areas have heterogeneous management techniques and quite extensive mixed cropping practices, 
often  with  low-yielding  traditional  varieties.  The  most  important  crops  were  maize,  yam,  millet, 
sorghum and peanut.  Even within a crop like sorghum, 8 to 10 different varieties have been identified 
that react differently to management practices. 

Information  on 
the  very 
detailed  cropping  patterns 
was  obtained  though  high-
resolution 
in 
combination  with  field  work 
(based  on  QuickBird  NDVI 
anomalies). 

imagery 

In  time,  SOC  measurements 
and  model  outcomes  have 
been  studied  at  both  point 
level  and  aggregated  to  areas,  where  the  aim  was  to  minimize  uncertainty.  At  point  level  simplified 
DSSAT simulations of SOC have been assimilated with field measurements using the Ensemble Kalman 
Filter.  

At point-level (Jones & al., 2004, 2007; Koo, 2007), using the EnKF reduced measurement uncertainty by 
around 60%. Furthermore, over space the EnKF reduced uncertainty by 50%, although results proved to 
be  very sensitive  to initial estimates of parameters. In other words, there  is uncertainty on departure 
from steady state as well as uncertainty on planting dates. 

Besides  this  research,  ICRISAT  is  instrumental  in  the  worldwide  AgMIP  project.  This  is  a  distributed 
climate-scenario  simulation  exercise  for  historical  model  intercomparison  and  future  climate  change 
conditions that goes further than just crop modelling. Many crop and agricultural economics modelling 
groups  around  the  world  are  contributing.  The  goals  of  AgMIP  are  to  improve  substantially  the 
characterization  of  risk  of  hunger  and  world  food  security  due  to  climate  change  and  to  enhance 
adaptation capacity in both developing and developed countries. 

 

37 

3.17 Soil-water-crop modelling for decision support in Sub-Saharan west 

Africa: experiences from Niger and Benin 
Pierre B. Irénikatché  AKPONIKPÈ, Faculty of Agronomy, University of Parakou, Benin 

The Sahel region in West Africa suffers from low grain yields (millet yield often lower than 500kg/ha), 
caused  by  limited  and  uncertain  rainfall  (300-600mm  per  year)  compounded  by  low  soil  fertility. 
Although  numerous  improvements  have  been  proposed  over  the  years,  the  impact  of  agricultural 
research is still low. Small scale farmers rarely adopt new management methods and inputs. The main 
reason seems to be that farmers seek to reduce risk while scientists try to increase yields.  

The  University  of  Parakou  in  Benin  has  investigated  this  phenomenon.  It  has  studied  climate  risk 
management  in  S-W  Niger  where  a  high  temporal  rainfall  variability  is  normal  (annual  coefficient  of 
variance of  17 to 36 %, even 78% at a daily basis). There is also a high spatial rainfall variability. Farmers 
seem to adapt to the spatial variability by dispersing their fields within the village territory.  

The  University  set  out  to  investigate  the  hypothesis  whether  farmers  disperse  their  fields  to  reduce 
agro-climatic risk. 

A “household field dispersion index” has been developed to test the hypothesis. This index is sensitive to 
the distance between fields, but independent of the number of farms in the village as well as the total 
farm area of the farmer. Furthermore a “yield instability index” (to measure inter-annual variation of the 
household) and a “yield disparity index” (to measure the inter-annual variation of yields relative to the 
village area) were constructed. Soil fertility gradients were taken into account. Closer to the village soil 
fertility is usually higher.  

The main conclusions were as follows (Akponikpe et al., 2011): 

  There is no relation between cumulated annual rainfall and yield (see graph); 
 
  Field dispersion, as practiced by farmers in western Niger, allows to mitigate inter-annual yield 

Large spatial rainfall variability generates an even larger spatial variability in yields;  

variability at the household level, albeit to a limited extent. 

A  second  study  was  carried  out  in  Northern  Benin 
investigating the optimal amount of nitrogen that can 
be  applied 
fields., 
current 
recommendation being 30 kg per ha. 

farmers 

to 

the 

found 

The  University 
that  grain  yields  were 
considerably  lower  than  those  assumed  with  the 
recommendation  above.  In  part  this  is  explained  by 
farmers  using  un-improved    varieties  of  millet.  The 

study concludes that that around 15 kg of nitrogen per ha is the best optimum. 

 

 

 

38 

3.18 Wheat yield modelling in a stochastic framework within and post season 

yield estimation in Tunisia 

Eduardo Marinho and  Michele Meroni, FOODSEC Action, MARS Unit, JRC, Ispra, Italy 

As it is not possible to directly measure and model grain yields production, it is assumed that grain yields 
are  highly  correlated  to  biomass  yields.  Three  proxies  for  wheat  biomass  production  and  different 
statistical modelling solutions have been investigated for Tunisia. The aim was to select the proxy and 
statistical  model  providing  the  best  predictive  capacity  in  yield  estimation  avoid  over/under-
parameterization. 

The  study  area  encompassed  10  governorates  representing  88%  of  national  production  of  wheat  in 
Tunisia. The remote sensing data used were 13 years of SPOT-VGT fAPAR & NDVI as well as area fraction 
masks  for  cereals  from  aerial  photographs.  National  yield  statistics  were  available  on  the  level  of 
governorates. 

The biomass proxies tested were (1) NDVI and (2) fAPAR at a given dekad, and (3) the Integral of fAPAR 
during the period of plant activity, ∫fAPAR. The start and end of the season have been extracted pixel by 
pixel  from  the  fAPAR  time  series,  analyzing  the  shape  of  the  curve  and  setting  a  priori  percentage 
thresholds.  The  relation  between  these 
proxies and the final grain yield was assumed 
to  be  linear  and  it  was  modelled  under 
different  statistical  assumptions  (see  figure). 
All  the  models  have  been  assessed  through 
Jackknife  technique,  leaving  one  year  out  at 
time. It proved to be important to couple the 
phenology  of  the  crop  to  the  timing  of  the 
remote sensing imagery used. In this study, if 
no  phenological 
is  extracted 
from  the  imagery  itself,  the  end  of  April 

information 

imagery proved to deliver the best results. The most important findings are: 

  High  yield  variability  in  Tunisia  can  be  estimated  by  remote  sensing  techniques,  without  the 

 

 
 

involvement of a crop model; 
Improved  statistical  models  (i.e.,  fixed  and  random  effect)  have  a  significantly  positive  impact  on 
yield accuracy estimation; 
In Tunisia, ∫fAPAR outperforms other biomass proxies for yield estimation; 
In the absence of ground data, the ∫fAPAR is the best option for measuring crop yields because it is 
linearly related to pooled yield data (no distinction among governorates); 

  Finally,  the  role  played  by  data  scarcity  in  determining  the  most  suitable  approach  for  yield 
estimation was addressed. The trade-off between the ability of modeling regional specificities and 
over-parameterization has been emphasized in the case of a reduced sample size.  Results indicate 
that  the  selection  of  the  model  specification  should  take  into  account  the  number  of  available 
observations,  and  not  only  the  expected  spatial  heterogeneity  on  the  yield-biophysical  parameter 
relationship. 

 

 

39 

 

 

 

40 

4  References 

 
Akponikpe, P.B.I., J. Minet, B. Gerard, P. Defourny, and C.L. Bielders, 2011. Spatial fields dispersion as a 
farmer strategy to reduce agro-climatic risk at the household level in pearl millet-based systems in the 
Sahel: a modelling perspective. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, 151: 215-227. 

de  Wit,  A.,  Duveiller,  G.,  Defourny,P.,  2012,  Estimating  regional  winter  wheat  yield  with  WOFOST 
through the assimilation of green area index retrieved from MODIS observations. Agricultural and Forest 
Meteorology, in press. 

Drewry,  D.T.,  P.  Kumar,  S.  Long,  C.  Bernacchi,  X.-Z.  Liang,  and  M.  Sivapalan,  2010.    Ecohydrological 
responses  of  dense  canopies  to  environmental  variability:  1.  Interplay  between  vertical  structure  and 
photosynthetic pathway. Journal of Geophysical Research, 115, G04023, doi:10.1029/2010JG001341. 

Duveiller, G., F. Baret, and P. Defourny, 2012. Crop specific green area index retrieval from MODIS data 
at regional scale by controlling pixel-target adequacy. Remote Sensing of Environment, in press. 

Fang, H., S. Liang, G. Hoogenboom, 2011. Integration of MODIS products and a crop simulation model 
for crop yield estimation. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 32(4): 1039-1065. 

Hammer,  G.L.,  J.W.  Hansen,  J.G.  Phillips,  J.W.  Mjelde,  H.  Hill,  A.  Love,  A.  Potgieter, 2001.  Advances  in 
application of climate prediction in agriculture. Agricultural Systems 70: 515–553. 
 
Hank,  T., Bach,  H.,  Spannraft,  K.,  Friese,  M.,  Frank,  T.,  Mauser,  W.  2012.  Improving  the  process-based 
simulation  of  growth  heterogeneities  in  agricultural  stands  through  assimilation  of  earth  observation 
data, IEEE, IGARSS 2012 Proceedings. 
 
Hansen, J.W., A. Challinor, A. Ines,  T. Wheeler, and V. Moron, 2006. Translating climate  forecasts  into 
agricultural terms: advances and challenges. Climate Research. 33: 27–41. 
 
Hansen,  J.W.,  Challinor,  A.,  Ines,  A.,  Wheeler,  T.,  Moron,  V.  2006.  Translating  climate  forecasts  into 
agricultural terms: advances and challenges. Climate Research. 33: 27–41. 
 
Hansen,  J.W.  2005.  Integrating  seasonal  climate  prediction  and  agricultural  models  for  insights  into 
agricultural practice. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society. B. 360: 2037-2047 
 
Hansen J.W., Indeje, M. 2004. Linking dynamic seasonal climate forecasts with crop simulation for maize 
yield prediction in semi-arid Kenya. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology. 125: 143–157. 
 
Immerzeel,  W.W.,  and  P.  Droogers,  2008.  Calibration  of  a  distributed  hydrological  model  based  on 
satellite evapotranspiration. Journal of Hydrology. 349: 411-424. 

Ines, A., Das, N.N., Hansen, J.W. and E.G.Njoku, 2012. Assimilation of remotely sensed soil moisture and 
vegetation with a crop simulation model. Remote Sensing of Environment. Under review. 

 

41 

Ines,  A.,  and  K.  Honda,  2005.  On  quantifying  agricultural  and  water  management  practices  from  low 
spatial  resolution  RS  data  using  genetic  algorithms:  A  numerical  study  for  mixed  pixel  environment. 
Advances in Water Resources. 28: 856-870. 

Mauser, W., Bach H. (2009): PROMET  – a Physically Based Hydrological Model to Study the Impact of 
Climate Change on the Water Flows of Medium Sized, Mountain Watersheds, J. Hydrol., 376(2009)362-
377. 

Pauwels, V. R. N., and G. J. M. De Lannoy .2009. Ensemble-based assimilation of discharge into rainfall-
runoff    models:  A  comparison  of  approaches  to  mapping  observational  information  to  state  space. 
Water Resources Research. 45, W08428, doi:10.1029/2008WR007590. 

Rojas,  O.,  2007.  Operational  maize  yield  model  development  and  validation  based  on  remote  sensing 
and agro‐meteorological data in Kenya. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 28: 3775-3793. 

Sehgal, V.K., Jain, S., Aggarwal, P.K., and S. Jha, 2011. Deriving Phenology Metrics and Their Trends Using 
Times Series of NOAA-AVHRR NDVI Data. Journal of Indian Society of Remote Sensing 39: 373-381.  

Vermeulen, S., Zougmore, R., Wollenberg, E., Thornton, P., Nelson, G., Kristjanson, P., Kinyangi, J., Jarvis, 
A., Hansen,  J., Challinor,  A.,  Campbell,  B. and P.  Aggarwal. 2012. Climate change,  agriculture and food 
security:  a  global  partnership  to  link  research  and  action  for  low-income  agricultural  producers  and 
consumers. Environmental Sustainability. 4:128–133 
 
Vermeulen, S.J., Aggarwal,  P.K., Ainslie,  A.,  Angelone,  C., Campbell, B.M., Challinor,  A.J., Hansen, J.W., 
Ingram,  J.S.I.,  Jarvis,  A.,  Kristjanson,  P.,  Lau,  C.  ,  Nelson,  G.C.,  Thornton,  P.K.,  E.  Wollenberg.  2012. 
Options  for  support  to  agriculture  and  food  security  under  climate  change.  Environmental  Science  & 
Policy 15:136-144. 
 
Varella, H., M. Guérif, S. Buis, and N. Beaudoin, 2010. Soil properties estimation by inversion of a crop 
model and observations on crops improves the prediction of agro-environmental. European Journal of 
Agronomy. 33: 139-147. 

Vazifedoust, M., J.C. van Dam, W.G.M. Bastiaanssen and R.A. Feddes, 2009. Assimilation of satellite data 
into agrohydrological models to improve crop yield forecasts. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 
30: 2523-2545. 

Verhoef,  W.,  Bach,  H. 2012. Simulation  of  Sentinel-3  images  by  four  stream  surface  atmosphere 
radiative transfer modeling in the optical and thermal domains.  Remote Sensing of Environment, 120 : 
197-207. 

Zabel, F., Mauser, W., Marke, T., Pfeiffer, A., Zangl, G., and C. Wastl. 2012. Inter-comparison of two land-
surface  models  applied  at  different  scales  and  their  feedbacks  while  coupled  with  a  regional  climate 
model. Hydrology and Earth System Science. 16: 1017–1031. 

 

 

 

42 

5  Acronyms and Abbreviations 

AGRHYMET  Centre for Agriculture, Hydrology and Meteorology 

AgMIP  

Agricultural Model Intercomparison and Improvement Project 

AGROMETS
HELL 
AMSR 
AUV 
AVHRR  
C3 
C4 
CCAFS 
CCE 
CGIAR 
CSM 
DSSAT 
ECMWF  
EnKF  
EOS 
ESSP 
ETA 
EVI 
FACE 
FAO  
FAPAR 
FASAL 
GAI 
GWSI  
IARI 
ICRISAT  
INRA 
IRI 
JRC 
LAI 
LINGRA 
LINTUL 
MARS 
MERIS  
MLCan 
MM5 

FAO Water Balance Model implementation 

Advanced Microwave Scanning Radiometer 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle 
Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer 
Carbon fixation method in photosynthesis for most crops in temperate regions (e.g., wheat) 
Carbon fixation method in photosynthesis for some crops in tropical regions (e.g., maize) 
Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security research program of the CGIAR 
Crop Cutting Experiments  
 Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security  
Cropping System Model 
Decision Support System for Agro-technology Transfer 
European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts 
Ensemble Kalman Filter 
Earth Observing System, a coordinated series of polar-orbiting and low inclination satellites 
Earth System Science Partnership 
Actual Crop Evapotranspiration 
Enhanced vegetation Index 
Free Air Carbon Enrichment  
Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations 
Fraction of Absorbed Photosynthetically Active Radiation 
Forecasting Agricultural Output Using Space, Agromet and Land Observations (India) 
Green Area Index 
Global Water Satisfaction Index 
Indian Agricultural Research Institute 
International Crops Research Institute for Semi-Arid Tropics 
French National Institute for Agricultural Research 
International Research Institute for Climate and Society 
Joint Research Centre of the European Commission 
Leaf Area Index  
A grass growth model developed by ALTERRA, Wageningen. Based on LINTUL 
Light INTerception and UtiLization simulator. A simple general crop growth model 
The “Monitoring Agriculture with Remote Sensing” project of the JRC - AGRI4CAST 
MEdium Resolution Imaging Spectrometer 
Vertically resolved canopy-atmosphere exchange model 
Mesoscale crop growth model of Pennsylvania State University 

MODFLOW  Groundwater model 

 

43 

MODerate-resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer 
METEOSAT Second Generation 
Nitrogen 

MODIS 
MSG 
N 
NADAMS  National Agricultural Drought Assessment & Monitoring System (India) 
NASA 
NDVI 
NGO 
NIR 
NOAA 
OLS 
ORYZA1 
PROMET 
PROSAIL 
RS 
SAR 
SOC 
SPOT 
STICS 
SUCROS 
SWAP 
TM 
TRMM 
USGS 
VGT 
WARM 
WFP 
WOFOST  WOrld FOod Studies. Simulation model for the quantitative analysis of the growth and 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration (USA) 
Normalized Difference Vegetation Index 
Non-governmental organization 
Near Infrared 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 
Ordinary Least Squares  
Eco-physiological model for irrigated rice production. 
Crop Growth Model of VISTA (German company) 
Radiative transfer model 
Remote Sensing 
Synthetic Aperture Radar 
Stable soil organic carbon  
Système Pour l'Observation de la Terre (French satellites) 
Generic model for the simulation of crops and their water and nitrogen balances. 
Simple and Universal CROp growth Simulator 
Soil Water Atmosphere Plant model 
Thematic Mapper 
Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission 
United States Geological Survey 
VEGETATION sensor on board the SPOT satellite 
Rice crop model used at JRC 
World Food Programme 

WRSI 

production of annual field crops 
Water Requirement Satisfaction Index 

WTGROWS  Crop simulation model for regional wheat yield mapping 

 

 

 

 

44 

6  Workshop Program 

 
Wednesday, 13 June 2012 

09:00-09:10  

Welcome address, JRC 

Opening session 

09:10-09:25 

Crop Forecasting within the CCAFS Program, James Hansen, CCAFS, IRI-Columbia University 

09:25-09:40  

The challenges of an operational crop yield forecasting system in Sub-Saharan Africa. Is there a 
realistic and effective solution? Francois Kayitakire, JRC 

09:40-10:10  

Integration of agro-hydrological modelling, remote sensing and geographical information, Jos 
van Dam, Wageningen University 

Session 1 

10:45-11:15 

Assimilation of remote sensing observations into a crop model improves predictive 
performance for spatial application, Martine Guerif, INRA 

11:15-11:45  

Regional Crop Simulation Modelling for Yield Prediction using Remote Sensing and GIS: Indian 
Experiences, Vinay Sehgal, IARI-India  

11:45-12:15  

Using MODIS LAI to estimate maize yield, Gerrit Hoogenboom, Washington State University 

12:15-12:30           Discussion 

Session 2 

14:00-14:30 

Exploring the climatic response of the central US agro-ecosystem, Darren Drewry, NASA-JPL 

15:30-16:00  

On the assimilation of remotely sensed soil moisture and vegetation with crop simulation 
models, Amor Ines, IRI, Columbia University 

Session 3 

16:30-17:00 

Simultaneous Estimation of Model State Variables and Observation and Forecast Biases using 
a Two-Stage Hybrid Kalman Filter, Valentijn Pauwels, Ghent University 

17:00-17:30 

Satellite image simulations for data assimilation at multiple scales, Heike Bach (VISTA) and 
Wolfram Mauser (University of Munich) 

17:30-18:00 

Estimating crop biophysical properties from remote sensing data by inverting linked radiative 
transfer and ecophysiological models, Kelly R. Thorp, USDA 

 

45 

18:00-18:15 

Discussion 

Thursday, 14 June 2012 

Session 4 

9:00-09:30 

MARS operational crop monitoring and yield forecasting activities in Europe and possible 
improvements based on remote sensing data, Gregory Duveiller, JRC  

09:30-10:00 

Experiences with satellite data assimilation for regional crop yield forecasting, Allard de Wit, 
Alterra 

10:00-10:30 

Operational crop yield forecast using remote sensing and agrometeorological in West Africa, 
Bernard Tychon and Bakary Djaby, University of Liege 

Session 5 

10:45-11:15 

Data Assimilation based on the Integration of Satellite Data and Field Sensor Data for Drought 
Monitoring, Kiyoshi Honda, Chubu University  

11:15-11:45 

Data assimilation for the carbon cycle in Sudanian smallholder communities, Sibiry Traore, 
ICRISAT 

11:45-12:15 

Soil-water-crop modeling for decision support in sub-saharan West Africa: experiences from 
Niger and Benin, Pierre Irénikatché AKPONIKPE, Université de Parakou 

12:15-12:45 

Wheat yield modelling in a stochastic framework – within and post season yield estimation in 
Tunisia, Eduardo Marinho and Michele Meroni, JRC 

Session 6: Discussion and way forward 

14:30-16:30 

James Hansen, CCAFS, Chair of the session 

16:30-17:00 

Meeting conclusions 

 

 

 

46 

7  Participants 

Participant 

Insitute 

Country 

Francois Kayitakire 
Amor Ines 
Jos van Dam 
Gregory Duveiller 
Narendra Das 
James Hansen 

Pierre Akponikpe 
Heike Bach 
Allard de Wit 
Bakary Djabi 
Darren Drewry 
Gregoy Duveiller 
Martine Guerif 
James Hansen 
Kiyoshi Honda 
Gerrit Hoogenboom 
Amor Ines 
Francois Kiyitakire 
Eduardo Marinho 
Michele Meroni 
Valentijn Pauwels 
Vinay Sehgal 
Wilco Terink 
Pierre Sibiry Traore 
Jos van Dam 

Bettina Baruth 
Herve Kerdiles  
Olivier Leo 
Raul Lopez 
Giancarlo Pini 
Ferdinando Urbano 
Christelle Vancutsem 
Peter Hoefsloot 

 

 

Workshop Steering Committee 

Joint Research Centre 
IRI, Columbia University 
Wageningen University 
Joint Research Centre 
NASA-Jet Propulsion Lab 
CCAFS; IRI, Columbia University 

Presenters 

University of Parakou 
VISTA-Geo 
Alterra 
University of Liege 
NASA-Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
Joint Research Centre 
INRA 
IRI, Columbia University 
Chubu University 
Washington State University 
IRI, Columbia University 
Joint Research Centre 
Joint Research Centre 
Joint Research Centre 
Ghent University 
Indian Agricultural Research Institute 
FutureWater 
ICRISAT 
Wageningen University 

Other Participants 

Joint Research Centre 
Joint Research Centre 
Joint Research Centre 
Joint Research Centre 
Joint Research Centre 
Joint Research Centre 
Joint Research Centre 
Hoefsloot Spatial Solutions 

 

47 

Italy 
USA 
The Netherlands 
Italy 
USA 
USA 

Benin 
Germany 
The Netherlands 
Belgium 
United States 
Italy 
France 
United Sates 
Japan 
United States 
United States 
Italy 
Italy 
Italy 
Belgium 
India 
The Netherlands 
Mali 
The Netherlands 

Italy 
Italy 
Italy 
Italy 
Italy 
Italy 
Italy 
The Netherlands 

8  Sponsors 

The  workshop  and  report  were  supported  by  the  CGIAR  Research  Program  on  Climate  Change, 
Agriculture  and  Food  Security  (CCAFS)  –  a  strategic  partnership  of  the  CGIAR  and  the  Earth  System 
Science Partnership (ESSP), led by the International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT). CCAFS brings 
together the world’s best researchers in agricultural science, development research, climate science and 
Earth System science, to identify and address the most important interactions, synergies and tradeoffs 
between climate change, agriculture and food security. CGIAR is a global research partnership for a food 
secure  future.  CCAFS  is  supported  by  the  Canadian  International  Development  Agency  (CIDA),  the 
Danish International Development  Agency (DANIDA), the European Union (EU), with technical support 
from the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD). The views expressed in this document 
cannot be taken to reflect the official opinions of CGIAR or ESSP. 

 

The Joint Research Centre of the European Union (JRC) is the European Commission’s in-house science 
service.  It  provides  the  science  for  policy  decisions,  with  a  view  to  ensuring  that  the  EU  achieves  its 
Europe 2020 goals for a productive economy as well as a safe, secure and sustainable future. The JRC 
plays  a  key  role  in  the  European  Research  Area  and  reinforces  its  multi-disciplinarity  by  networking 
extensively  with  leading  scientific  organisations  in  the  Member  States,  Associated  Countries  and 
worldwide. 

 

 

48 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

European Commission 

EUR 25643 – Joint Research Centre – Institute for Environment and Sustainability 

 

Title: Combining crop models and remote sensing for yield prediction: Concepts, applications and challenges for 

heterogeneous, smallholder environments 

 

Author(s): Peter Hoefsloot, Amor Ines, Jos van Dam, Gregory Duveiller, Francois Kayitakire and James Hansen 

 

Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union 

 

2012 –  52 pp. – 21.0 x 29.7 cm 

 

EUR – Scientific and Technical Research series – ISSN 1831-9424 (online) 

 

ISBN 978-92-79-27883-9 (pdf) 

 

doi:10.2788/72447 

 

 

 

Abstract 

 

JRC and CCAFS jointly organized a workshop on June 13-14, 2012 in Ispra, Italy with the aim to advance the state-of-

knowledge  of  data  assimilation  for  crop  yield  forecasting  in  general,  to  address  challenges  and  needs  for  successful

applications of data assimilation in forecasting crop yields in heterogeneous, smallholder environments, and to enhance 

collaboration and exchange of knowledge among data assimilation and crop forecasting groups. 

The workshop showed that advances made in crop science are widely applicable to crop forecasting. The presentations 

of  the  participants  approached  the  challenge  from  many  sides,  leading  to  ideas  for  improvement  that  can  be 

implemented in real-time, operational crop yield forecasting. When applied, this knowledge has the potential to benefit 

the livelihoods of smallholder farmers in the developing world. 

z 

L
B
-
N
A
-
2
5
6
4
3
-
E
N
-
N

 

As the Commission’s in-house science service, the Joint Research Centre’s mission is to provide 
EU  policies  with  independent,  evidence-based  scientific  and  technical  support  throughout  the 
whole policy cycle. 
 
Working  in  close  cooperation  with  policy  Directorates-General,  the  JRC  addresses  key  societal 
challenges while stimulating innovation through developing new standards, methods and tools, 
and sharing and transferring its know-how to the Member States and international community. 
 
Key  policy  areas  include:  environment  and  climate  change;  energy  and  transport;  agriculture 
and  food  security;  health  and  consumer  protection;  information  society  and  digital  agenda; 
safety  and  security  including  nuclear;  all  supported  through  a  cross-cutting  and  multi-
disciplinary approach. 

