International African Institute

From Tidal Swamp to Inland Valley: On the Social Organization of Wet Rice Cultivation among
the Diola of Senegal
Author(s): Olga F. Linares
Source: Africa: Journal of the International African Institute, Vol. 51, No. 2, Rice and Yams
in West Africa (1981), pp. 557-595
Published by: Cambridge University Press on behalf of the International African Institute
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/1158828 .
Accessed: 14/06/2014 18:48

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp
 .
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 .

Cambridge University Press and International African Institute are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to Africa: Journal of the International African Institute.

http://www.jstor.org 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Africa, 51(2) 1981 

FROM  TIDAL  SWAMP  TO  INLAND  VALLEY:  ON  THE 
SOCIAL  ORGANIZATION  OF  WET  RICE  CULTIVATION 

AMONG THE DIOLA OF SENEGAL 

Olga F. Linares 

INTRODUCTION 

Students of  West  African rice  agriculture (cf.  Dresch  1949,  Mohr  1969) often 
distinguish between the Upper Guinea coast, where wet rice has been grown for 
centuries in  permanent swamp fields recovered from the  mangrove, and a  more 
extensive area further inland, where the predominant form has been dry or mountain 
rice grown by shifting agriculturalists (fig. 1). The Diola of Senegal (Pelissier 1966, 
Linares 1970), the Balanta of Guinea Bissau (Espirito Santo 1949), and the Baga of 
coastal Guinea (Paulme 1957), belong to the first category. They transplant rice in 
inundated fields that are desalinated, diked, ridged and irrigated. In contrast, the 
Mande-speaking peoples of Sierra Leone and Liberia are mostly 'upland' farmers. 
They broadcast rice on rain-fed fields that are rotated and fallowed.' 
In this essay I hope to show that even within one small region, and one ethnic group, 
techniques  for  growing  rice  vary  enormously.2 Moreover,  this  variation  is 
accompanied by  subtle but  profound differences in  land  tenure and  the  social 
organization of production. It is my impression that much of the current literature 
quantifies adequately the economic aspects of agriculture (yields, farm size, available 
labour etc.) but ignores or treats only superficially social and ideological forces shaping 
different modes of cultivation. Without a more profound appreciation of these forces, 
little progress can be made in understanding, let alone improving, traditional practices. 
The present discussion centres on the Diola, an acephalous wet rice growing people 
numbering three hundred thousand who  occupy the  inland deltas of  the  Basse 
Casamance River in southwestern Senegal. A comparison of three Diola villages in 
southern Casamance will, I hope, demonstrate that differences in modes of cultivation 
are accompanied by far-reaching differences in land tenure and the social organization 
of production. Shifts in the mode of production seem to be related in turn to changes in 
both the natural and social environment, as groups migrated north within the Manding 
sphere of influence. Such differences in productive relations as exist between coastal 
Diola swamp cultivators and more 'Mandingised' inland Diola apparently have wide 
parallels elsewhere, in other rice-growing regions of West Africa. Thus, the last part of 
this paper will be devoted to a comparison of the Diola with other groups further down 
the  Guinea Coast. The  question I  would like to  explore is  whether the contrast 
between 'intensive' and upland rice cultivators is a matter primarily of technological 
and ecological differences or is  an outcome of the total way in which social and 
productive relations are organized. 

THE NATURAL ENVIRONMENT 

The Basse Casamance region of southwestern Senegal covers some 75,000 km2 of low- 
lying terrain on both sides of the Casamance River. Cut off from the rest of the country 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DIOLA WET RICE CULTIVATION 

558 
to the north by the former British colony of Gambia, with its predominant Wolof and 
Manding (Malinke, Mandingo) population, the Diola still speak of going to Dakar as 
visiting Senegal. To  the east, the Songrougrou River separates the Diola homeland 
from that of their Manding neighbours in the Middle Casamance. Within the Basse 
Casamance itself, cultural and natural factors also hinder communications. Although 
Diola is a West-Atlantic language, at least 15 different dialects are spoken in this area 
(Sapir 1965). Small clusters of isolated villages have also evolved different variants of 
Diola culture. 
The Casamance is postulated by Porteres (1962) to have formed part of an ancient 
heartland where indigenous varieties of the African rice species Oryza glaberrima were 
domesticated. Although Asian rice (Oryza sativa), was brought to West Africa by 
Portuguese explorers in the early 16th century, it did not reach the Diola until two 

FIG. 1. Rice-growing societies of the Upper Guinea Coast discussed in the text (Mande-speaking peoples underlined). 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DIOLA WET RICE CULTIVATION 

559 

FIG. 2. Diola of the Lower Casamance. 
centuries ago, supplanting the native species within the memory of living elders. By 
the time of first European contact, the Diola and their relatives in what is now Guinea- 
Bissau had already converted much of the mangrove swamp fringing the tidal estuaries 
of  important rivers into  a  network of  paddy fields.  Their  techniques of  diking, 
desalinating, ridging, and transplanting almost certainly antedate all European contact 
(Pelissier 1966, Lauer 1969). Indeed, they may have practised intensive agriculture on 
continuously cropped land for a thousand years or more (Linares 1970).3 In this 
respect they are atypical of African cultivators, the majority of whom practise shifting 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DIOLA WET RICE CULTIVATION 

560 
cultivation (Goody 1971,  1976), despite some well known exceptions (Gray 1963, 
Netting 1968). 
The climate of the Basse Casamance is strongly seasonal. Although the annual rains 
are expected to begin in June and end in October, and to reach a minimum of at least 
1000 mm everywhere, they are highly variable in volume and timing. Twice in the 
last 15 years, Bignona and Ziguinchor have received only half the expected yearly total. 
For the same month, the amount of rain may fluctuate enormously in consecutive 
years. The September rainfall recorded in Ziguinchor in 1974 was 258.0 mm, 471.3 
mm in 1975, and 213.7 mm in 1976. The amount of rain also decreases as one moves 
north in the Diola area. 
Undoubtedly, the  most salient characteristic of  the  land is  its  low  relief and 
amphibious landscape. The Basse Casamance is so flat that the Diola have no word for 
mountain, using the French word 'montagne' for the small termite hills that dot their 
land. Although low plateaus do occur, they rise imperceptibly to no more than 15 to 20 
meters above sea level. Skirting these sandy plateaus, where the Diola have their 
villages, their sacred forests, and in the north their groundnut and millet fields, are 
numerous marigots, or tidal river channels, some quite wide, like those of Dioloulou or 
Baila. The marigots extend through valleys or depressions covered with rich alluvial 
materials deposited on a clayey base. Badly drained, these valleys are easily inundated 
during the rainy season, thus providing ideal conditions for an aquatic plant such as 
rice. By the same token the problem of drainage may be severe. Each year during the 
dry season, tidal brackish waters ascend the marigots, affecting ricefields located as far 
as  150 km inland. In  coastal villages, near the  mouth of  the  Casamance River, 
impressive dikes with sluices and ducts control the water of the marigots in and out of 
the more exposed ricefields. If the rains are sufficient, the salty waters will be pushed 
downstream during the  rainy season; but  if  the  rains are insufficient, salts will 
accumulate in the ricefields, with disastrous consequences for the rice crop. This is 
essentially what is happening as a result of the Sahelian drought of 1968-73 onwards. 
In previous years (1964-66),  when the rains were abundant, the Diola villagers I 
observed everywhere from the Basse Casamance River to the Gambian border were 
still working the deep fields. In later years salinization had killed even the highly 
resistant mangrove vegetation. 
The intensity with which rice is cultivated in the Basse Casamance varies along an 
ecological-cum-population gradient. The farther north and east one goes, the drier the 
climate, the fewer the rivers and marigots, and the sparser the settlements. In the <800 
mm rainfall belt east and north of the arrondissement of Tangori population densities 
may fall below ten persons per km2. Here wet rice cultivation gives way to the Sudanic 
complex of plants grown in sandy soil elsewhere in Senegal: millet (Pennisetum sp.), 
sorghum (Sorghum sp.) and introduced American plants that also do well in semiarid 
environments, including the groundnut (Arachis hypogaea), Senegal's leading export 
crop. 
As one moves southwest to the Kajaamutay area, rainfall increases to  1000-1300 
mm, marigots extend well inland, population densities average 35 person per km2, and 
wet rice cultivation becomes more important. Typical for this area is the Kujamaat 
village of Jipalom, where wet rice is the most important crop and the most traditional, 
but where wives and husbands also cooperate in the cultivation of groundnuts as a cash 
crop. 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DIOLA WET RICE CULTIVATION 

561 
A third important Diola subregion known as the Kasa lies on the southern shores of 
the  Casamance River delta. A  wide network of  marigots and rainfall averages of 
1200-1500 mm, permit a labour-intensive wet rice monoculture, supporting up to 65 
persons per km2, to be practised on the heavy clayey soils of the floodplain and tidal 
swamps. This potential for agricultural intensification does not exist, at least to the 
same degree, in the drier areas. 
A rapid comparison of three villages may help illustrate the various ways in which 
Diola social organization and the agro-ecosystem are integrated in different regions. 
(Again the  villages are referred to  by  pseudonyms) I  will  begin with  a  detailed 
description of  Jipalom because  I  know  it  better  and  it  is  also  intermediate, 
geographically as well as culturally, between the two other villages. Following that, I 
will extend comparisons to a village in the drier, and another in the wetter zones. 

SOCIAL AND PRODUCTIVE RELATIONS: THE THREE VILLAGES 

Jipalom in the Kajaamutay 
Jipalom, a pseudonym for a village in the area the Diola call the Kajaamutay, where I 
have spent 30 months at irregular intervals between 1959 and 1977, is fairly typical of 
this subarea of Fogny-speaking Diola north of the Casamance River. Data on the 
population of Kajaamutay villages has been abstracted from the 1964 census (Service 
de la Statistique, 1964 1972), and presented in Table  1. In my census of  1964 the 
population of Jipalom was 547 persons including 119 male agnates and their 154 
wives, plus a dozen or so old women, numerous unmarried young people and children, 
and a few Diola strangers from other villages. 

TABLE 1  A Comparison of the Means, Standard Deviations and Modal Distribution of Villages in 
Standard  Modal size of 
Regions 
Deviation 
643.01 
373.4 
254.8 

Mean size 
of Villages 
479.4 
387.6 
300.4 

No. of 
Villages 
47 
31 
88 

Villages 
0-300 
0-300 
0-300 

three Regions' 

Total 

Population 
22,533 
12,014 
26,434 

Oussouye 
Kajaamutay 
Tangori 
1 pC .063; no significant difference. 

The Kujamaat Diola live in hamlets or compounds grouped into wards. Each ward 
is  separated from the  next by  patches of  sacred forest, where boys  are initiated 
approximately every 25 years. Loose groupings of wards make up a village (esuuk), but 
the entire population of a village seldom cooperates, except during the boys' initiation 
orfutamp. Even then, each ward (ulol, sg.) carries on its own activities in its own sacred 
forest. At present there are five wards in Jipalom, one of which has three large sub- 
wards that will eventually become independent. The wards are divided into siluup (pl.) 
or compounds.  Despite  the  vagueness  with  which  genealogic  connections  are traced, 
co-resident agnates with an eluup (sg.) usually regard themselves as 'brothers', if they 
are equivalent in age, or as 'fathers' and 'sons' if they are not. Members of the same 
eluup often, though not always, share the same exogamous patronym and are therefore 
forbidden from marrying each other's sisters. The  eluup in turn breaks down into 
residential units I have called courtyard groups (unkao pl., fank sg.; from courtyard or 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DIOLA WET RICE CULTIVATION 

562 
fank). A fank is usually inhabited by one extended patrifilial group. The majority of 
the households within a fank are conjugal units occupying different houses. A few 
uterine relatives, solitary female agnates, widows, and resident strangers may also 
reside in a fank. The mean number of village born male agnates per fank in the ward 
(Bojas) where I did my most intensive work was 2.57 or 3.8 if one includes 'strangers'; 
the most common household type was elementary (a conjugal family); only one of the 
nineteen households was extended (i.e. a man and his married son living under the 
same roof). 
At this point I should mention the relative importance of principles of descent and 
residence in the organization of Diola society. During stages in the developmental 
cycle  of  the  domestic  group (Goody  1958)  some  individuals may  reside with 
matrilateral kin.  Otherwise the  Diola  consistently observe the  virilocal rule  of 
residence. In  1961 there were half a dozen non-agnates residing in  'my' ward in 
Jipalom; in  1976 they had all gone back to their respective villages. The localized 
residential  units  are  therefore  predominantly  agnatic  in  composition.  This 
correspondence between locality and descent would seem to offer fertile ground on 
which to build a classic segmentary lineage structure. However, this does not occur. 
Diola lineages are not 'political units, defined as corporate groups in a system of such 
groups' (M.G. Smith 1955: 59), but are rather localized, patrifilial groups, named after 
the elder (i.e. 'Malam's group'), and bound together by locality rather than descent. 
Two co-resident agnates, often from the same compound (eluup), or even from the 
same house (fank), will when asked how they are related, say they are 'brothers because 
their forefathers were brothers,' and leave it at that. Further questioning will not elicit 
more precise information for the simple reason that, as a general rule, co-resident 
agnates know little and care less about exact genealogical links to a common ancestor. 
Although they recognize relations of common descent, they do so with reference to a 
sibling pair no more than three of four generations back in time. Thus the Diola use 
loosely the idiom of paternal and fraternal kinship to structure their most meaningful 
local groups. And like many other West African groups, they also rely on matrilateral 
kin (agnates of M, FM, FFM, MFM, in that order), who constitute personal kindreds, 
for usufruct rights to land, for mediation of disputes, for protection and for extra land. 
However, changes of filiation to a matrilateral group are very unusual among the 
Diola. Institutions such as widow inheritance, corporate agnatic ownership of land, 
buying back of agnatic children born out of wedlock, strong male initiation rites, and 
so  forth, all  seem  to  be  consistent with  a  patrilineal ideology.  To  convey  the 
'intermediate' character of the Diola local groupings, which fall halfway between 
egocentric kinship systems based on filiation, and ancestor-orientated systems. I will 
describe them as patrifilial descent groups. What seems important, however, is not the 
label but the fact that among the Diola the emphasis on residence, rather than on 
descent, facilitates cooperation without regard to how closely, or how distantly co- 
resident persons may be related by traceable genealogical ties. One may go as far as to 
say that the  Diola  conceive of  their social system as  a  projection of  territorial 
arrangements, rather than the other way around. 
The importance of matrilateral connections in Diola society has been obscured in 
the literature by an overemphasis on so-called 'patrilineal clans'. In reality, uterine 
links may help to clarify and even to authenticate patrifilial relations. Two co-resident 
males will say they are 'brothers' but, if pressed to be specific, they usually have to 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DIOLA WET RICE CULTIVATION 

563 
refer to matrilateral connections. For example, if two individuals want to establish that 
they had the same exact paternal grandfather they would go about it by recollecting 
where  their  father's father's uterine  relatives were  born.  Obviously,  the  same 
grandfather could not have had different mother's brothers. The collectivity of a man's 
uterine kin,  referred to  as  sipai,  includes his  mother's agnates from  her  natal 
compound, or those from his mother's mother, his father's mother's mother, and so 
forth. The houses where a man 'touches'-that  is, where he is a real or classificatory 
sister's son (an asumpul)-are  remembered with great exactitude. This contrasts with 
the genealogical amnesia that characterizes most agnatic relationships more than a 
couple of generations in the past. Rules of exogamy excluding uterine collaterals, such 
as matrilateral cross-cousins, from marriage are strict among the Fogny. One should 
not take a wife from one's own mother's, FM's, or MM's household. To do so would 
be to risk loosing uterine priviledges if the marriage somehow fails, which it often 
does. The end-effect is a mandatory expansion of valuable matrilateral ties. 
Most villages in the Kajaamutay are dispersed rather than nucleated. The  seven 
Jipalom wards are strung out over a hundred and twenty hectares; the closest wards are 
500 m apart; the two most distant are a kilometre apart. Whether near or far, all wards 
are located along slightly raised terrain facing an important marigot. Fanning out from 
each of  the Jipalom wards, following a gentle gradient down to  the marigot, are 
hundreds of irregularly shaped paddy fields, each surrounded by a bund (or levee) to 
retain water and demarcate fields (Fig. 3). The fields of one Jipalom ward, where I did 
much of my work, cover 22.87 hectares and number more than 1,200 separate parcels, 
some measuring only 20 m2, others more than 3,000 m2. These parcels are grouped 
into three large classes: nurseries (kuyolen), rainwater-irrigated fields (biit), and fields 
partly flooded during the  rains by  marigot waters (weng fields). Within the  biit 
category, which takes up the largest area (13.43 ha), fields are further differentiated on 
the basis of soil type and water retention properties (Linares 1970: 205-206). 
The highly localized nomenclature applied to field classification reflects the Diola 
peasants' inability to modify in any extensive way the local topography. Slight contour 
differences in what would otherwise be considered flat terrain are accommodated, not 
by levelling out great expanses of cultivable land, but by creating a multitude of small 
bunded parcels each one of  which is  made as level  as possible. This  allows for 
impounded rainwater to spread evenly over each parcel. But such fragmentation of the 
land adds to the difficulty of water drainage and distribution. The  inhabitants of 
Jipalom share some rainwater by slashing through or plugging up the bunds. Also, for 
a person to steal water from a neighbour's field by boring a hole through a common 
bund is not unknown. Conflict over water, however, is minimal in Jipalom. Fields are 
mostly inundated by rainwater, which falls democratically over the fields of rich and 
poor alike. Some excess water is drained out of the fields by means of small canals, but 
much of it is left to stagnate and gradually dry up. 
In the case of the Diola Fogny of Jipalom I estimate the mean area of paddy land 
owned by an agnate as 1.2 ha (plus about 1 ha of dry-crop upland). These calculations 
are based on the map I made for all the paddy fields owned by the 19 agnates of one 
Jipalom ward. (As mentioned, their collective fields covered 22.87 ha or an average of 
1.2 ha of paddy land per person). Table 2 presents the actual area cultivated by five 
conjugal households of roughly equal size: a man, his wife, an unmarried adult son or 
daughter, and two small children. As we can see from this table, there are marked 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

564 

DIOLA WET RICE CULTIVATION 

TO WENG 

SIBAAF 

R" 

^  .  . 

. r  . 

0 ~ 

50m 

2N 

FIG. 3. Section of Rice Field Map from Jipalom: nurseries (kuyolen), shallow rainfed (biit) deeper rainfed fields 
(kuyelen), sandy and shallow rainfedfields (sibaaf), deep fields bathed by marigot (weng). 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DIOLA WET RICE CULTIVATION 

565 
differences in the amount of paddy land, exclusive of nurseries, worked by individual 
male agnates, ranging from a minimum of 0.605 ha, to a maximum of 1.13 ha. Limited 
in the amount of land they can work with their hoe technology, the Diola must employ 
a number of cultivation strategies to minimize risks and assure production from year to 
year. 
TABLE 2  Area, exclusive of nurseries, cultivated in paddy by six Jipalom conjugal households. The 
number of plots cultivated by each household varies between 30 and 80. The households are roughly 

the same size (3 adults and 2 children). 
square meters 
hectares 
1.13 
1.05 
0.853 
0.744 
0.718 
0.605 

11,125 
10,460 
8,525 
7,435 
7,175 
6,051 

Households 

A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
F 

Equivalent 
in acres 
2.79 
2.59 
2.11 
1.84 
1.77 
1.51 

Transplanting, which is done by women, increases the likelihood that the young 
plants will  survive by  reducing their vulnerability to  weeds and insects, and by 
increasing the plants' tolerance for the prevailing salinity. Growing several varieties of 
0.  sativa and several of 0. glaberrima, each having different properties and maturation 
rates, spreads the risks posed by insufficient rain and spaces the harvest. A single 
woman may utilize anywhere from five to  fifteen varieties, which she  constantly 
exchanges with other women, experimenting with new kinds, eliminating the less 
successful. Generally, women transplant the slow-growing varieties in the deeper weng 
fields, and the faster-maturing varieties in the shallower biit fields. However, if halfway 
through the rainy season, it looks as if the rains will be insufficient, she may change 
tactics and transplant fast-growing varieties in the deeper fields. Decisions about what 
kinds of rice to plant, in which parcels, and when, are made by a woman herself 
without much interference, but with some advice from her husband. 
Knowledge of soil and water conditions in different paddy fields at different times is 
a man's area of expertise. This is logical since men stay put, as post-marital residence is 
virilocal; they 'own' the land and prepare it. Fields may shift in function as the season 
progresses. In a rainy year, for example, some shallow fields may retain enough water 
to be prepared like deeper ones, with the topsoil simply being turned over and new 
ridging foregone. Following this shift in preparation will be a temporary shift in that 
field's classification. 
Strategies used in rice production may also be adjusted to social needs, not just to 
natural circumstances. Sickness, obligations to kin, and religious duties all interfere 
with the time available for work during the labour-intensive rainy season. If pressed for 
time, a woman does things like transplant only half the plants in the nursery, leaving 
the other half to mature in place. Or she may forego transplanting altogether in some of 
the  fields, broadcasting the seed directly. If time is  not limited, however, and if 
conditions permit, a woman can do extra things, like filling in with additional plants a 
parcel whose rice was damaged by insects. The men may also cut corners and skip 
some of the steps in field preparation, or they may do the opposite: prepare a field 
twice in  one season, the first time around broadcasting fast varieties, the second 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

TABLE 3  Persons Involved in Preparation and Transplanting of Yentam (rainfed) Fields in Jipalom and their Relation to the 'Owners' 

A' 

Agnate 
'owner' Ridged and furrowed (karingolen) by: 
-3  real brothers (a-i); 3 days 
-  6 boys from village where uterine 
-  2 real brothers (h: l-o); 2 days 
-  1 brother started plot i; another 

kin live (j-t); 1 day 

A 

finished with 4 boys from Jipalom 
working for wages. 

(m-r); 1/2 day 

-  1 brother alone (j-k, p); 2 days 
-  1 brother alone (q, s); 1 day 
-3  brothers (t-z); 1 day 
-himself(a-d);  3 days 
-  himself(e-l);  5 days 
-4  boys from mother's natal village 
-  himself (s-v); 5 days (?) 
-himself(a-d);  1 day 
-  himself, plus brother and brother's 
S (e-q); 1 day 
-himself(a);  1 day 
-himself  (b-c); 1 day 
-  himself(d-e);  1 day 
-himself  (a-f); 1 day 

-himself  (a-c); 2 days 
-  himslefand S (d-r); 3 days 
-  himslefand FB (a-i); 3 days 

Transplanted (borokab) by 
-15  women from nearby village, 
recruited by Z at place where 
she married (a-t; 1 day) 

-wife  (plot h); 4 days 
-wife  (plots l-o); 2 days 
-wife  (plot i); 4 1/2 days 
-wife  (j, k, p); 2 days 
-  12 women's societe from eluup; 

1/2 day. 
-  real Z; 3 days 
-  16 women from village where another 
-  real Z; 4 days 
-13  women from the women's societe 

Z is married (plots e-r); 1/2 day. 

of the eluup; 3/4 day. 

-  wife (broadcast seed on plot a; 
1/4 day 
-wife,  with help of her mother; 
2 days (b-e) 
-wife  (a-d); 1 day 
-  12 women: societe of his own 
eluup; 1/2 day 
-  12 women from societe of his own 
eluup; kepejel (pulled out half) 
from a-c; transplanted d-r; 1 day. 

-wife  (a-e; g); 5 days 
-  mother (f, h, i); 2 days 

Rainfed  Number of plots 
(i.e. parcels) 
(Yentam) 
20 (a-t) 

e%f% I _ 

I 
1 

\ 

Total area 
4,100 m2 

19 (h-z) 

4,675 m2 

2 

9 

11 

12 

13 

18 

24 

22 (a-v) 

4,387 m2 

B2 

17 (a-q) 

1,262.5 m2 

5(a-e) 

650 m2 

13 (a-m) 

950 m2 

18 (a-r) 

1,750 m2 

9 (a-i) 

975 m2 

C 

D 

E 

F 

G 

= agnate A is recently married and thus gets more than 'normal' help; 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DIOLA WET RICE CULTIVATION 

567 
transplanting slower ones. Freedom to experiment, change tactics, make decisions 
about what to do or how to allocate one's labour is individual and complete among the 
Diola. This freedom to respond individually to natural and social circumstances as the 
season progresses reduces risks and lends added flexibility to the wet rice system. 
In Jipalom, as indeed among the majority of Diola, some of the work in the fields is 
done by the conjugal family alone, or with the help of a few kin. In Table 3, I have 
listed the persons who were involved in performing two basic steps in the cultivation 
process: the karingolen (or 'hoeing', done by men), and the borokab (or transplanting by 
the women). The fields, belonging to eight different agnates, are by no means all the 
land that each agnate owns, but they are a good example of the types of work done 
alone or in groups. As we can see, the karingolen is often done by the owner himself, 
with the occasional help of his brothers; transplanting is often done by the agnate's 
wife, with the help of a daughter or mother. 
At some phases of the agricultural cycle, cooperative work in the fields increases the 
ability to respond decisively to optimal conditions as they occur. Since the Diola of 
Jipalom do not regulate to any appreciable extent the flow of water in and out of their 
fields, they are at the mercy of the rains, and of the drying sun, for appropriate 
moisture levels to perform the cultivating, transplanting, and harvesting in a group of 
fields. There is a real advantage in completing all work on one field rapidly in order to 
avoid differential ripening. Furthermore, communal labour is certainly more pleasant 
than working alone, and may actually increase the pace of work. Therefore, a large 
number of hands must periodically be mobilized to perform the work in a short time. 
The  karingolen is  sometimes  performed by  groups  of  boys  from  Jipalom  or 
neighbouring villages (Table 3). Similarly, transplanting is sometimes in the hands of 
ad hoc groups of women from Jipalom itself or from nearby villages. In fact, a great 
deal of group labour is informally recruited, on a voluntary basis, following traditional 
rules of kinship reciprocity and friendship. Thus, a widower relies on his out-married 
sister to round up a group of women to transplant his fields; the next year this work 
will be done by a totally different group. A man recruits boys from his mother's natal 
village, to give him a hand in exchange for cash (250 CFA or the equivalent of $1.00 a 
day in 1965), or simply a good meal; next year he may do the karingolen in the same 
fields by himself. 
However, not all work is done by ad hoc groups recruited as 'catch can'. Within each 
ward there are more formally organized work groups called sikuf (pl.), ekuf (sg.), which 
the Fogny Diola gloss as societe. The  men's societe is drawn on residential and age 
criteria. All the man in a ward may constitute an ekuf. The ekuf from the Bojas ward 
was paid 12,500 CFA or one live bull for one and half day of work. Within an ekuf, 
older men (40-55  years old), younger men (unmarried youngsters or young married 
men), or even children may work apart. The younger men's ekuf often goes out to work 
in other villages, to be paid in cash; if work is for one of the important elders of the 
ward, however, their recompense may be  no  more than millet beer. Among the 
women, on the other hand, the sikuf are of two types: one, the most active, is composed 
of all the in-married women (the kusek) of the ward or compound; the other is made up 
of the out-married women agnates (furimen), who are dispersed and seldom work 
together. The ekuf of the kusek of Bojas gets paid 5,000 CFA for a whole day's work in 
another village. With this money, the women buy cattle, which they set aside to 
sacrifice at the girl's circumcision ceremony. The president of the women's efuk is one 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DIOLA WET RICE CULTIVATION 

568 
of the male agnates. To summarize, the pattern seems to be for the in-married women 
or kusek to  help  each other, and for the  women agnates to  help  their brothers 
individually. Only seldomly does an arimen, or female agnate, help an asek, or in- 
married woman, and only when it is the wife of a real brother. When working in 
rotation in the fields of each other, the kusek do not get paid in cash, but instead get a 
compensation of millet beer and a good meal. In short, then, persons who cooperate 
regularly in organized work groups share among themselves residential or kinship ties, 
the former being more common among the women, the latter among the men (Linares 
1970). 
Several lines of  evidence indicate that everywhere in  the  Diola area, labour is 
nowadays in short supply. In 1965, 34 Jipalom born males, or roughly one-fourth of all 
the men in the village, plus 33 unmarried young girls, were away, mostly in Dakar. In 
the same year, an estimated 8 hectares of paddy fields owned by one individual Jipalom 
ward alone lay unused despite the abundant rains. 
Table 4 represents the number of work days (calculated as one individual working 8 
hours) required to prepare five yentam (rainfed) fields in five kacalak (rows of parcels) 
belonging to five different agnates of the Bojas ward. The total dimensions of all of the 
fields taken together is 4,375 m2, or slightly over one acre (4,047 m2). It is interesting 
to note that the total number of hours (528) it takes to prepare the Jipalom fields is 
more or less comparable to the figure (91- 103 six-hour work-days, or 546-618 hrs. per 
acre) given by Currens (1979) for the Loma of Sierra Leone, who practise shifting 
agriculture. In the conclusions to this paper I will also discuss the implications of this 
data. Suffice it here to point out that in Jipalom the most important cause of the 
chronic labour shortage, besides the pull of Dakar, is the encroachment of other crops. 
Groundnuts have become increasingly important as a cash crop since they were 
introduced in this area at the turn of the century. After the drought of the last years, 
the Fogny Diola have begun growing more millet and sorghum than ever before. 
Permanent forms of cultivation obviously require a great deal of sedentism, of 
staying in the same locality. The time and effort spent improving and building up the 
paddies result in highly individualized rights in land. 
In  the  Kujamaat land tenure system, one  sees  the  dynamics of  Diola  social 
organization at work. Briefly put, land usage in Jipalom is based on the inalienable 
right of every resident male to cultivate paddy fields in  his agnatic environment. 
Residual rights to these fields lie with each patrifilial group, which usually occupies a 
single courtyard (fank). The eldest functioning male of each patrifilial group must 
redistribute these fields equitably among his sons (or brothers's sons if their father is 
dead), in strict response to the needs generated by the developmental cycle of each 
domestic group: the boys that come of marriagable age and must have land, the new 
wives added on or those that get divorced, the male agnates that die off or leave, and so 
on.  Redistribution of usage rights to specific parcels is a constant and democratic 
process in response to fluctuating family size. Any evidence of favouritism in the part 
of a father towards a particular son is vigorously condemned; fatherless nephews, 
however, may occassionally get short-changed. Once fields are allocated they can never 
be taken back without the person's consent. Hence, the problem of adjusting the 
available land to the size of families is resolved by constant face to face adjustments 
within  the  fank  of  rights  to  cultivate specific  small  parcels with  unchanging 
boundaries. 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

TABLE 4  Labour-input in a number of Diola Yentam  (rainfed) fields, compared with labour-inputs for upland fields among the Loma of Liberia. The 

total surfaces of the fields (4,375 m2 and 4,047 m2) are similar. 

DIOLA (Jipalom) 

Ridge and Furrow 

(karingolen) 

Transplant 
(borokab) 

Yentam1 
26(a-h) 
33(a-e) 
49 (a-f) 
58 (m-z) 
217 etc. 

TOTALS: 

Dimensions 

inm2 
1,200 
450 
752 
1,037 
925 
4,375m2 

Prepare 
Nursery2 

.5 
.2 
.33 
.5 
.5 
2.03 

4.0 
1.5 
2.0 
4.0 
2.0 
13.5 

5.5 
1.0 
2.0 
5.0 
5.0 
18.5 

Work-days 

Harvest 

8.0 
3.0 
5.0 
8.0 
8.0 
32.0 

Brushing  Felling  Clearing  Planting  Weeding  Watching birds 

Work-days 

LIBERIA4 

17 
16 

18 
15 

Harvest 
35.0 
30.5 

9 
9 
4From  Currens 1979, table 4,  p.  91,  average work-days 
per acre (an acre measures 4,047  m2). 
5  Calculated as 6 hours per work-day. 

9 
9 

1972 
1971-1972 
For  a  map  of  these  yentam  see  map  3 
2  In fractions of a work-day 
3  Calculated as 8  hours per work-day 

4 
4 

11.0 
7.5 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DIOLA WET RICE CULTIVATION 

570 
In order to carry out normal cultivation practices, and at the same time minimize the 
risks of pests, weeds and insufficient rain, a person should have fields in each of the 
land categories mentioned previously. This means that a man's holdings in a ward will 
be scattered: he will have clusters of parcels in different areas of the biit, a few nurseries 
in the forest or near his house, at least one large plot in the weng and so on. This makes 
it  very  difficult-and  in  fact very  risky, socially and  ecologically-for  any  one 
individual to consolidate his holdings, or to attempt incorporating the fields of others. 
Agnates in the same or different patrifilial groups have the option of borrowing 
fields from each other by temporarily exchanging cattle for land (by pledging). Fields 
that are pledged should eventually be returned if reclaimed by the owner. But in 
practice borrowed fields tend to stay indefinitely in the possession of the borrower. 
Transactions of this sort may lead to conflict and even to the disruption of patrifilial 
groups. A conscious effort is thus made to borrow from agnates who are close in space, 
but distant in relation. This is another instance of the advantages offered by a system of 
shallow patrilineal reckoning. 
The  care that the Kujamaat Diola of Jipalom take in avoiding possible agnatic 
competition over land is demonstrated in the case of female agnates. Although women 
lack direct access to fields, they may temporarily borrow parcels if they go back to their 
natal villages to live. But lending is never by close agnates from her own patrifilial 
group, for this is considered taboo; it is always by distant agnates or other kin. 
There is another important way for a man to  obtain land besides inheriting it 
patrilineally, and this is through complementary filiation. An individual may borrow 
paddy fields from his uterine kin, who are under the obligation to lend him fields when 
possible. Since uterine ties are manipulated for access rights, not only to land, but also 
to chickens, to protection, and so on, they are worth remembering. Agnatic relations, 
however, are given and fixed, and can only be activated within narrow limits; they are 
useful for the here and now and need not be recalled. 
Thus far I have ignored the extent to which the Diola vary locally in details of social 
structure, religion, language and technology, while at the same time sharing basic 
cultural principles such as an emphasis on a non-centralized polity, a belief in  a 
plurality of localized spirits, a manual technology, and so forth. Regional variations are 
pronounced in the realm of agriculture, for this is perhaps the most localized aspect of 
Diola culture. In the following pages I will contrast Jipalom with two other villages: 
Fatiya in the drier northeast sector and Sambujat in the delta of the Casamance River. 
It is important to keep in mind that these three villages are less than 70 km apart, as the 
crow flies, and yet differ greatly in social and political organization. 
Fatiya in the Tangori area 
The census for 1964 lists 88 villages for the arrondissement of Tangori and a total 
population of 26,434, giving a mean village size of 300.4 inhabitants (Table 1). Fatiya 
was founded some sixty years ago by three old men, two of them brothers, from the 
land-hungry town of Sindian to the north who were searching for ricefields. At that 
time, Fatiya was tiny, with extensive, untouched forests nearby. The original settlers 
cut back the forest and staked out large tracts of land. As more people came to Fatiya 
from neighbouring villages, they kept on 'lending' land to the newcomers so that today 
all the bottomlands and most of the upland fields have been allocated (Linares ms. 
1980). 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DIOLA WET RICE CULTIVATION 

571 
In 1949 Fatiya had less than 20 inhabitants. By 1970 the population had grown to 
166,  and by  1977, when  I  made my  own  census of  the village, the  number of 
inhabitants exceeded 300 (of whom  132 were married adults). Being close to  the 
Manding or Malinke peoples, who for centuries have influenced those Diola living 
near the periphery of Diola territory, the inhabitants of Fatiya are all Muslims and 
have adopted, in modified fashion, some of their neighbours' institutions. In fact four 
Manding families lived there in  1977, specializing in making pottery, and wooden 
pestles and mortars. 
Only the descendants of the founding families comprise the three named wards 
found in the village. The rest of the male agnates belong to courtyard groups called 
unkao (pl.) or fank (sg.), as in Jipalom. These groups are usually referred to by their 
patronyms in conversation: 'the Jeju', 'the Dembo', etc. The largest of the 15 existing 
unkao has four agnates. The unkao break down into individual households, composed 
of polygynous families called kujiim (pl.) or bujiim (sg.). Diola who speak French gloss 
this word as 'carre'. 
Kinship and marriage links within the village are diffuse. Marriage is polygynous; 
the 67 wives married to the 39 Fatiya heads of household in  1977 came from 24 
different villages. Of the 39 male heads of household, only ten are native-born. The 
other 29 came to Fatiya from ten different villages (Linares ms. 1980.). 
Because Fatiya is located inland, away from major rivers and marigots, the amount 
of bottomland available for paddies is limited. It is restricted to a narrow depression 
between plateaus, flooded during the  rainy season. Only two  types of  fields are 
distinguished, depending on the amount of rainwater runoff. Not  only is the total 
paddy area much smaller that that of Jipalom, but it is also more unequally distributed. 
Much of it is in the hands of the founding families who are said to 'own' the village and 
its lands. 
Females born in Fatiya are crucial in the process of land usage and transmission. 
Resident female agnates who are widowed or divorced are customarily lent rice fields 
by  close male agnates, either their own brothers or their father's brothers. This 
practice, as we have seen, is discouraged in Jipalom. Now, a significant percentage of 
Fatiya men are recent immigrants. In order to legitimize their stay in the village they 
seek to marry one of the female agnates, preferably a daughter of one of the old 
families. If this comes to pass, the fields she worked before and after marriage may be 
inherited by their children in perpetuity. Thus,  Fatiya women who are residing in 
their natal village have the right to cultivate agnatic lands and, if they marry in situ, to 
pass rice paddies on to their children, unlike the women of Jipalom. This accords well 
with the independent role of women in the relatively less important rice culture of 
Fatiya. 
Rice field work in Fatiya is done exclusively by women. Men attend strictly to the 
raising of  groundnuts, millet and other crops by bush fallow shifting cultivation. 
These products, and those from their house-gardens they regularly sell in Bignona. It 
is the women, and not men as in Jipalom, who prepare the rice fields using a long- 
handled hoe (the ebir) with which they polder without making ridges. Although 
arduous, their task is facilitated by lighter soils, fewer fields, and more level terrain 
requiring fewer bunds than in Jipalom. Women in Fatiya also do all the transplanting, 
weeding and harvesting, Not  surprisingly, only they, and not also the men as in 
Jipalom, own granaries. Since rice work in Fatiya does not depend on a balanced sex 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DIOLA WET RICE CULTIVATION 

572 
ratio, a man (especially if he is a Muslim and landed) can keep on adding wives without 
upsetting the system. As a result, some households, especially those belonging to 
members of the founding lineages (see below) can be quite large. 
Bush and rice lands are nominally 'owned' by the three patrilineages (A, B,  C) 
descended from the original village founders. The  ten male descendants distribute 
fields to more recent arrivals, with the result that a stranger's borrowed fields are 
usually scattered. For example, an individual we will call Laming, who arrived in 
Fatiya in 1952 had, in 1970, four rice fields, half a kilometer or more apart, worked by 
his two wives. He had married the older wife in his natal village and brought her with 
him; the  second wife  comes from Fatiya and is  the daughter of  one of  the  ten 
descendants, an individual we will call Mamodou, who is in lineage A. The first two 
biit (rainfed fields) that Laming borrowed were lent to him by Osuman, who is in 
lineage B; one of the other two fields was lent to him by Mamadou's brother, the 
second by Mamadou himself. These last two fields will be inherited by Laming's 
children via their mother, whereas the first two fields will be inherited by Laming's 
daughter's sons because she married Osuman's brother's son. In this manner, then, the 
progeny of 'strangers' eventually get assimilated into the village. The four rice fields 
Laming borrowed are larger on  the  average and flatter then  the Jipalom fields. 
Together they measure 2,723 m2 and are worked jointly by Laming's two wives. In 
1977 Laming married a third wife and at the same time was lent a fifth paddy by one of 
the agnates in lineage B. All three wives work the five fields together, and store the 
harvest in the same granary. They contribute one tenth of the rice harvest to their 
husband, for him to use in feeding strangers and extra labourers. 
The groundnut and millet fields are distributed in more or less the same fashion. Let 
us consider the three fields Laming works: one field he owns outright by having 
cleared it himself in 1961 with the help of three paid Fulani workers. This new field 
measures 15,842 m2, or roughly one and a half hectares, and is his to keep. In addition 
he continues to work two other fields that were lent to him in 1952; one was lent by the 
same Osuman who had lent him the rice fields, the other was lent by another agnate in 
lineage C, who is the village chief. These two last fields are almost identical in size, 
measuring each 665 m2. Laming cultivates with his father, plus a younger brother, and 
a uterine relative who resides with them. These three persons are also recent settlers 
who have borrowed fields. They and Laming rotate their fields together. This rotation 
increases the possibility that parcels can be rested when necessary. In addition, Laming 
also borrows groundnut fields in other neighbouring villages. The men who do this 
displace themselves for the whole season, living in their host's house and paying him 
ten percent of the cash groundnut sales for the use of his land. The fallow cycle for 
millet and groundnut fields varies enormously. In Laming's case, he cultivates each of 
the fields for no more than three years in succession, then lets them fallow for a year or 
two. When he is away, Laming hires a societe to do his groundnuts in exchange for 
payment in  cash. To  summarize, in  Fatiya, all  rice-field work, from hoeing to 
harvesting, is done by women, working alone, with co-wives or in small ad hoc work 
groups. In contrast, most work in the groundnut and millet fields is done by men, in 
cooperation with one or more brothers and perhaps, a father, in fields that are jointly 
rotated and fallowed. It is common for the village women's societe to help men with the 
millet harvest for which they are paid in cash. 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DIOLA WET RICE CULTIVATION 

573 

Sambujat, in the Casamance River Delta 
Sambujat is  located  in  the  'Kasa',  within  the  Casamance River  delta,  in  the 
arrondissement of  Oussouye  (Table  1).  Although  villages  in  Oussouye  vary 
considerably in population, the preferred village size (i.e. the modal size) is still small, 
0-300  persons. Some villages, however, are very large with over 1,000 inhabitants 
(several villages have more than 2,000 and one has over 3,000 inhabitants). In 1964 the 
population of Sambujat was 342 persons, of which 69 were male agnates and 65 were 
their wives. 
In  contrast to  Jipalom and  Fatiya,  whose  residential units  (i.e.  wards and 
compounds) are strung out, the Sambujat settlement pattern is nucleated; the village 
covers 10.2 ha (cp. with 120 ha for Jipalom and 36 ha for Fatiya). 
Oral traditions trace the history of Sambujat to the Ejamat area near the border of 
Guinea Bissau, whence the inhabitants are said to have come in search of ricefields. 
The ideology of emigration is pervasive. Even the most conservative and apparently 
changeless village in the Basse Casamance maintains the tradition of having come from 
elsewhere in the not too distant past. Oral traditions, as we will see, are historically 
revealing, and may help to 'explain' Diola social history. 
In Sambujat, as elsewhere, the most inclusive residential unit is the named ward 
(kajong). There are two such wards, each including roughly half the village residents. 
Several important ritual offices essential to the maintenance of moral order must be 
strictly rotated between the two wards. But ward membership does not  regulate 
kinship or marriage; the kajong is neither exogamous nor is it composed of special 
lineage segments. The next most inclusive residential unit after the kajong is the hank 
(sg.; unkao, pl.) or courtyard group, the linguistic cognate of the Fogny-Diola fank, as 
in Jipalom and Fatiya. Members of a single Sambujat hank share a common social 
identity, a group shrine (upila), are exogamous, and also act as residual landholding 
corporation. However, the hank does not, any more than the fank, constitute one 
clearly defined lineage, in the sense that all its members can actually trace descent to a 
common ancestor. Although individuals making up  a  hank assume they  have a 
common progenitor, there is no emphasis on establishing the exact genealogical links 
that presumably unite them. The same is true for other Diola-related groups such as 
the Ehing described by Schloss (1980: 44). In Sambujat there are nine unkao varying 
greatly in size (see Table 5). Next in line is the ukin or patrilineal household. Again, 
this category is not identical with what we call a patrilineage, for there are nearly twice 
as  many households, or  families that occupy a  common dwelling,  as  there are 
patrilineages-that is agnates who can actually trace genealogical connections. The 
households also vary greatly in composition; the majority (52.4%) are elementary, 
composed of one conjugal pair, or a FD or a MS pair. Larger households, with more 
than one conjugal pair, and/or more than one generation, comprise 45.2% of the total. 
Thus, even in Sambujat, patrilineages are fairly shallow, and households fairly small. 
Though larger than in Fatiya, households in Sambujat are still composed of conjugal 
families that are autonomous in economic matters. 
The region of Oussouye displays the most intensive variant of the Diola wet rice 
system. Not only are rice fields in Sambujat much larger on the average than those of 
Jipalom and also deeper and more watered, but Sambujat has an additional class of 
field, the mangrove paddy. Mangrove paddies are large, deep, parcels originally carved 
out of  the tidal swamp. The  creation of  a mangrove paddy involves clearing the 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

574 

DIOLA WET RICE CULTIVATION 

TABLE 5  Composition of Kinship and Residential Units in Sambujat 
Household types' 
frer. 
elem.  mult 
0 
3 
6 
0 
3 
2 
5 
0 
3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
3 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
5 
22 
10 

Hank  Agnates2  Patrilines  Structs.  Sol. 
1 
A 
0 
B 
0 
C 
0 
D 
0 
E 
0 
F 
0 
G 
0 
H 
0 
I 
1 
9 

10 
7 
16 
5 
5 
4 
4 
4 
14 
69 

grand. 

0 
0 
1 
1 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
4 

4 
3 
6 
1 
1 
1 
2 
2 
3 
23 

10 
5 
9 
1 
4 
1 
4 
1 
2 
37 

(Tot: 42)3 
sol. = solitary, a  man or woman alone; elem. =one  conjugal pair, or FD,  or MS; 
mult=F  and married S; fr&r=frereche, two or more married BB; grand.= F,  FB, 
and married SS. 
2  Number of 'strangers' (or agnates from other unkao) in Sambujat =  one in B; one in 
D; two in G. 
.548 of  all households are sol.  and elem; .238 are mult; 119 are frer.; .095 are 
3 
grand. 

mangrove, building the dikes, desalinating and ridging. 
Regulating the amount and flow of marigot waters and the degree of salinity in the 
paddies by means of dikes and sluices (ducts) is much more developed in Sambujat 
than in Jipalom where, as we have seen, rainwater is only occasionally moved from 
one paddy into another or allowed to drain downhill. While in Jipalom brackish 
marigot waters often  ruin  the  weng, in  Sambujat an  enormous encircling dike, 
extending for several kilometers, bars the tidewaters that ascent the marigot in the dry 
season. Although the  dike was  originally built  by  all  the  village  men  working 
cooperatively, each section is  now  maintained by  the  individuals who  own  the 
adjoining fields. The only place where villagers are still collectively responsible for 
maintaining the dike is the spot where an important marigot flows in. If this part of the 
dike were to break, saltwater would quickly ruin most of the village lands. Otherwise 
the building and maintaining of large earthworks in  Sambujat involves very little 
organization and no centralized planning. 
The most extensively cultivated area, the buhit, is flooded by marigot waters. Here, 
in the fields known as desamu, tidal waters must be impounded during the rainy season 
when their natural salinity has been lowered. Although the Sambujat fields were not 
mapped in detail, it was obvious to me (and to my Jipalom assistant) that individual 
fields are much larger here than in Jipalom. The  exception may be the weng and 
kuyelen fields of Jipalom which, like the desamu fields, average one-fourth to half a 
hectare in size. From statistics given for yields in this part of Casamance (2,500-3,500 
kg/ha), plus my certain knowledge that the inhabitants regularly sell surplus rice, it 
seems evident that Sambujat's fields are more productive than those in Diola areas 
north of the river. 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DIOLA WET RICE CULTIVATION 

575 
While the sexual division of labour is complete in Fatiya, and complementary in 
Jipalom, in Sambujat, where men do not grow either groundnuts or orchard crops. 
both sexes regularly cooperate in the rice fields. The heavy work of dike-building and 
ridging is in the hands of men, and women do most of the transplanting, but it is not 
uncommon to see Sambujat men transplanting. Both sexes in Sambujat also guard the 
crops from weaver birds,  and both  help  with  harvesting. Balanced cooperation 
between man and wife is symbolized by the identical size of their granaries and the 
equal quantity of rice stored in each. It may well be a general rule that the more 
intensive the agricultural system (at least under manual cultivation methods) the more 
'balanced' the division of labour and the higher the degree of cooperation between 
spouses, who can substitute for each other (R. Netting, personal communication). 
Female agnates in Sambujat do not inherit land as in Fatiya, nor can they borrow 
parcels from distant agnates or from uterine kin as in Jipalom. This seems, on the 
surface, to contradict the aforementioned equality between the sexes. So it does, but it 
also reinforces, rather than weakens, the inter-dependence between the sexes. While a 
divorced woman in Fatiya can come home and be lent fields, in Sambujat her kin will 
not even feed her; if she wants to eat, she is forced to help others with agricultural 
tasks. A rapid re-marriage is the best solution to a divorced woman's anomalous status 
for it ensures the continuation of a system of production based essentially on the 
husband-wife team. 
Differences in female inheritance, or use, of agnatic land are further correlated in all 
three villages with how broadly is  exogamy defined. Among all Diola patronyms 
function to regulate marriage, but the rule that one does not marry a person with the 
same patronym as one's own applies with different degrees of exclusion. In Fatiya and 
Jipalom each ward is usually dominated by a single patronym (Baji, Sane, etc.), within 
which exogamy rules are strictly enforced; if the same patronym occurs in another 
ward of the village, the rule of exogamy still applies. In Sambujat, by contrast, the rule 
of patronymic exogamy is enforced at the level of the courtyard group (hank) only. 
Two persons sharing one of five patronyms present in the village can marry, provided 
they are not in the same hank. Thus, Sambujat is a fairly endogamous village; nearly 
half the men marry Sambujat-born women. 
In other words, in Jipalom and Fatiya, dispersed patronymic exogamous groups 
(which have been called 'clans') encourage marriage at some distance. In Sambujat, 
these 'clans' do not exist. Here the localized nature and small size of the co-resident, 
exogamic patrifilial group (the hank) allows for marriage nearby. As marriage between 
residents of  the  same ward may have taken place over several generations, the 
likelihood is great that a divorced woman's agnates are in some way also her ex- 
husbands actual or  compound brothers. Divorce  makes for  possible conflict  of 
allegiance between agnates who are also affines and who need to cooperate in many 
spheres besides agriculture. By denying a divorced woman rights to cultivate agnatic 
fields, the resident men reaffirm their solidarity. 
Most rice field work is done by the conjugal family. Although two brothers, or a 
father and son, may help each other prepare a particular parcel, in a particular year, 
extended households as a rule do not cultivate together. As elsewhere, additional 
individuals may be recruited singly or in groups at specific times of the year to provide 
extra labour. And, in contrast to Jipalom and Fatiya, in-laws in Sambujat regularly 
cooperate in rice field work. We may recall that agnates who are village 'brothers' may 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DIOLA WET RICE CULTIVATION 

576 
also stand in the relation of in-laws, having married each other's sisters, or having 
married women in the neighbouring community. It is my impression that men in 
Sambujat also cultivate often for their mothers' agnates. Not  uncommonly, a man 
rounds up a group of men from his own hank and takes them to do his mother's 
brother's fields. Finally, in Sambujat, some cultivating is done by societes. The most 
active societe is that of the young unmarried men who receive, as a group, wages of up 
to 10,000 CFA a day, (a sizable amount), when they go to another village. However, 
when they work for kin these same boys may only be paid in palm wine and pork meat. 
As in other Diola areas, Sambujat work groups tend to be small, and to be recruited 
only if and when they are needed. As will become clear later on, differences between 
societes, and the so-called companys or large work groups in Sierra Leone and Liberia, 
lie precisely in the more informal, ad hoc and voluntary nature of the smaller Diola 
work groups. 
Summary 
Salient aspects of the agricultural system and social organization of three Diola villages 
represent broad cultural patterns in  contrasting ecological regions: the  Kasa, the 
Western Kajaamutay, and the arrondissement of Tangori. Briefly put, Sambujat is a 
nucleated highly endogamous community in the most intensive swamp-rice growing 
area, where the sexual division of  labour is  equitably divided between men and 
women. In Sambujat, as well as in the other Oussouye villages, land is nominally 
owned by patrifilial groups, but rights of disposition over it lie with the conjugal units 
themselves. At the opposite extreme of this continuum is Fatiya, a new village made up 
largely of recent immigrants. In contrast to Sambujat, which is strongly corporate so 
that men are bound together by kinship ties of cooperation along cognatic as well as 
affinal lines, men in Fatiya are united, if at all, by more vertical and hierarchical 
relations between recent immigrants and the descendants of the founding families who 
own the village lands. Although the village chief cannot command the labour of others, 
he can buy labour on the open market. In Fatiya, the sexual division of labour is 
complete, with women growing only rice for subsistence, and men growing only cash 
crops and other grains for local consumption. The village is largely exogamous. Wives 
are drawn from 24 different villages: only 7% of the wives are locally born. In contrast 
to Sambujat where monogamy is the rule, Fatiya marriages are often polygynous. 
However, only a few individuals from the founding families can boast of having more 
than three wives. 
Jipalom is intermediate between Sambujat and Fatiya in geographical as well as in 
social ways. Although, in Jipalom, the men grow cash crops, they are helped in this 
endeavour by their wives. In return they prepare the fields for the women to transplant 
and harvest. A circle of six villages accounts for 66% of all Jipalom wives, which means 
that marriage takes place along a closed circuit. Although extra labour can be paid for 
in cash, many of the persons who participate in the larger work-groups (sikuf) are in 
fact kin or affines (in-married women) who may, or may not, demand to be paid. 
It  is  by  no  means coincidental that  differences in  the  social organization of 
production among the three villages are also accompanied by profound differences in 
the religious domain and in the structure of authority. To summarize, Sambujat is the 
more traditional (i.e. 'pagan') and egalitarian of the three villages, whereas Fatiya, with 
its Muslim faith, its founding families, its marabouts (Islamic practitioners), its village 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DIOLA WET RICE CULTIVATION 

577 
chief, and its links to the modern economy, is the most 'stratified'. That Fatiya is also 
the  most  profoundly influenced  by  Islam,  aquired through  contact  with  the 
hierarchically organized Manding who occupy the Middle Casamance and the Gambia 
now as in the past, should not surprise us either. Thus, in the section that follows, I 
have tried to review the recent history of Diola migrations, and their relations with the 
Manding. In order to show how the changes undergone by Fatiya brings it closer to a 
'prototypical' Manding model, I have also discussed the organisation of two Manding 
villages in Central Gambia. 

THE DIOLA EXPANSION AND ISLAMIC CONVERSION 

Nowadays, the Diola occupy the entire Basse Casamance, between the Gambia and 
Guine-Bissau, as far east as the 16th meridian or Songrougrou river. Archaeological 
and historical evidence suggests that the original Diola home-land was a much smaller 
strip of coast extending from the mouth of the Casamance River, east to the city of 
Zinguinchor, the present regional capital. When the Portuguese chronicler Valentim 
Fernandes (Monod, Teixeira da Mota, and Mauny, 1951: 57-64) first contacted the 
Diola (known then by the general term of Falupos) in  1506 or 1507, the majority 
seemed to be in or around the mouth of the Casamance River, perhaps near Oussouye, 
where Sambujat is now located. 
Sometime in the 15th century the Fogny ( a name given to one of the two important 
Diola dialects, as well as to the ethnic sub-group north of the Casamance River) began 
their spectacular expansion towards the northeast. In the following century they were 
already across the river, in the Buluf or Djougout (Mark 1976). All through the 17th 
century they continued to spread following the Baila and Bignona marigots. At that 
time the area north of the Casamance River was settled by the Banyun or Bainouk, 
speaking a totally unrelated language belonging to the Tenda-Nuufi family. Tenda- 
Nuun is now spoken by the Bedik, Koniagui and Biafada populations of the Upper 
Casamance; the Bainouk represent only a remnant population of  20,000  living in 
villages scattered throughout Fogny territory. 
At the time of first European contact, the Bainouk were organized into small trading 
states ruled by monarchs, like their eastern neighbours the Manding. Caught between 
an expanding Diola population in one direction, and an expansion of slave-raiding 
Manding peoples in the other direction, more and more Bainouk in the rural areas 
were absorbed, killed or sold into slavery (Lauer 1969). 
The end of the 19th century also witnessed great Manding excursions, known as the 
marabout wars, which kept the Fogny area know as Combo in complete turmoil. 
Leary (1971: 236) notes that the Manding jihads against the Diola may have actually 
retarded the latter's conversion to Islam, which may well have been perceived by the 
affected Diola as an enslaving, militaristic religion. 'When Islam finally began to make 
progress among the Diola, after Fod6 Kaba's downfall in 1901, it was through peaceful 
methods of example and instruction, not by force or threats.' (Leary 1971: 241). 
The Islamisation of Diola living west of Kajaamutay has been carefully researched 
by Mark (1976). Beginning in the 1890s the Boulouf Diola opened up long-distance 
trade with the Gambia, first in wild rubber and then in palm products. After 1913 they 
also started planting groundnuts as a cash crop, and as they entered into commercial 
transactions, they  began converting to  Islam. Among the  earliest converts were 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DIOLA WET RICE CULTIVATION 

578 
returned traders. In his work Mark explores how and why economic and social change 
followed upon  the  heels  of  religious conversion. He  suggests that  Islamisation 
contributed to  the  breakdown of  the  fankafu,  or  'extended patrilineal family 
compound'. 'Average size for a fankafu was about fifteen or twenty persons although 
some,  perhaps recently formed concessions in  which  the  off-spring had not  yet 
married, were smaller. Each nuclear family inhabited a house within the compound. 
Sons, so long as they remained in the family compound, were subject to the authority 
of  their father even  after they  had married.' Implicit in  Mark's analysis is  the 
assumption that because these were 'extended families' they also acted as economic 
corporations. However, if Sambujat's present hank is at all representative of the pre- 
Islamic situation, this was not necessarily true. The hank may indeed be composed of 
'extended' families, but the conjugal units within it are economically independent, 
especially in matters of land tenure and agricultural production. If we recall, members 
of a hank now share a common shrine, and a common ritual identity, but do not own 
land communally, nor regularly work it together. In Sambujat, as in Jipalom, a man's 
sons receive land from him at the time of marriage, and from then on they are free to 
lend it, to pledge it, to put it out of production, or to do anything with it they wish, 
except perhaps sell the land to a total stranger. By emphasising both common descent 
from the village founders, and formal hierarchical relations within and among lineages, 
Islam may have strengthened, rather than weakened, the agnatic household. In any 
case Islam has brought Fatiya close  to  a  Manding model. It  may, therefore be 
instructive to compare the social organization of production in Fatiya with that of two 
Manding villages in central Gambia described by Haswell (1963) and Weil (1973). 
In Genieri, the Manding village studied by Haswell, women traditionally grew 
upland rice in rainfed alluvial valleys, while men practised shifting agriculture of 
millet, and of groundnuts as a cash crop. Thus, the sexual division of labour between 
rice and other crops, was complete, as in Fatiya. Like other Mande-speakers (discussed 
later) the people of Genieri differentiate clearly between several social statuses. To 
quote Haswell (1963: 7): 'Social status favours those who are direct descendants of the 
original settlers and founders of the community; families coming in later, although 
they may have been living in Genieri for many years now, are still regarded by the 
oldest inhabitants and their off-spring as strangers.' 
In Genieri, as well as in other central Gambian villages like Bumari described by 
Weil,  a  shift  has  occurred in  the  last decade from upland to  tidal-swamp rice 
cultivation. Concomitant with this shift into the more productive swamp areas has been 
a decrease in the male labour available for shifting millet cultivation. As a result, more 
and more women are enlisting the help of men in the preparation of tidal-swamp 
paddies. At the same time there has been ' . . .a  sharp rise in  the tendency for 
members of the extended family, which formed the basis of the compound, to hive-off 
and establish nuclear family units'. (Haswell 1963: 27). 
It  may well be  that traditional swamp cultivation everywhere promotes highly 
individuated rights in productive land, contributing to the organization of the family 
into  small  nuclear units  of  production and  reproduction. Where the  units  of 
production is the conjugal family, it is free to recruit extra labour on an impermanent 
and intermittent basis, and also to engage in all sorts of land transactions. 
The  reverse hypothesis, that shifting rice cultivation is  associated with  larger 
households, more formally recruited work groups and, for historical reasons, with 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DIOLA WET RICE CULTIVATION 

579 
more hierarchical and Islamised societies, will also be explored in the section that 
follows. 

A COMPARISON WITH OTHER REGIONS BEYOND SENEGAMBIA 

The mangrove swamps bordering large rivers in the Upper Guinea coast seem to have 
served as refuge for a number of non-Islamised groups organized into isolated and 
highly autonomous villages.4 There is sufficient information on at least a few of the 
coastal  societies  from  Guine-Bissau and  Guinea  (Conakry) to  suggest  that  in 
technology and social organization they are very similar to the Diola of the Kasa and 
different from their inland neighbours. 
The Balanta of Guinea Bissau are the most numerous of five populations speaking 
languages closely related to Diola. It is generally agreed (Espirito Santo 1949, Teixeira 
da Mota 1950, 1951; Carreira and Meireles 1960, Carreira 1961) that the Balanta, 
together with the Kasa Diola, have cultivated rice in mangrove channels for hundreds 
of years. The Balanta build up their deep and productive rice fields by ancient diking 
techniques very similar to those employed by the Diola of the Casamance River delta. 
Their original homeland was probably Mansoa; but in the last decades they have 
begun massive migrations into unoccupied, easily flooded lands (Carreira and Meireles 
1960). 
Of the cultivated areas near the Geba, Mansoa and Rio Cacheu, the largest belong to 
the Balanta, with  59,500 hectares of land under rice cultivation, supporting rural 
populations at densities of  50 to  75  person per km2. The  Baressi Balanta (Mohr 
1969:81) produce three quarters of the wet rice grown in their country. Impressive, 
well-built dikes, frequently ten to twelve kilometers long, surround the village lands. 
Controlling the flow of fresh and tidal waters in and out of fields recovered from the 
mangrove by a process of desalination is done with 'automatic' sluices built into the 
dikes (Espirito Santo 1949:215-16; Teixeira da Mota 1950:136). These productive 
paddies give yields that vary between 2,500 and 3,500 kilograms per hectare (Espirito 
Santo:224). 
Among the Balanta, village lands are equitably distributed; every farmer gets a 
parcel next to the dike which he is in charge of building and repairing. The political 
and social organization of the Balanta is poorly known, but most sources agree that 
their society has always been acephalous; social relations were and still are regulated by 
councils of  village elders rather than by  chiefs.  Their  villages are inhabited by 
patrilineal families holding residual rights to fields, house-gardens, oil palm groves and 
herds. However, rights of disposition over land seems to be in the hands of smaller 
units, usually conjugal families whose division of labour is identical to that of the Kasa 
Diola. 
The  Balanta may also be compared with other coastal groups of Guine-Bissau, 
namely the Manjak, Papel, Bijago and Brame (also known as Mancain). Although the 
Balanta of  Bissora, the  Brames of  Bula and the  Manjak of  Pelundo have been 
influenced by Islam through contact with Fula and Manding, the majority of the 
coastal populations still practice the traditional religions. Similarly, they all share in 
the 'complexo do arroz', though few practice wet rice cultivation exclusively. In fact, the 
Brames are  the  best  cultivators of  dry  rice  and  groundnuts in  Guine-Bissau. 
Apparently, shifting cultivation of rice also predominates among the Manjak, whereas 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DIOLA WET RICE CULTIVATION 

580 
the Bijagos, located on  sandy islands, dedicate themselves to  important maritime 
endeavours in addition to upland rice (Carreira 1961). These societies can be grouped 
into two broad categories. First are those groups like the Manjak and the Brame who 
accept the authority of political and religious chiefs on matters concerning land use and 
distribution. The  second category is  constituted by  the  Floup,  Bayot (or Diola), 
Balanta and Bijago, who do not have chiefs or important religious leaders from whom 
permission has to be sought before an individual is allowed to cultivate. 
Among the Manjak agriculture is done by large groupings: adolescents or adults 
organized according to age classes; household heads working together for short periods 
of time. Also, the Manjak, and possibly the Brame, have ways of renting extra land, 
either through temporary arrangement lasting one  to  six years, or through more 
permanent contracts lasting the rentee's lifetime. The amount of land rented can vary 
from one to twelve hectares, and the rentee is under the obligation to fertilize and 
conserve it.  In short, scattered evidence suggests that non-Islamised groups having 
chiefs and some measure of social stratification (the Manjak and Brame) also practice 
shifting cultivation of upland rice in which they employ work groups larger than the 
'extended' family. Among the Manding and Fula of the interior shifting cultivation of 
groundnuts and millet in upland areas also predominates, even though some rice is 
grown in smaller freshwater swamps. In contrast, the most intensive tidal swamp rice 
cultivators have egalitarian polities and non-stratified social systems. 
In coastal Guinea we come to the Baga Fore, another population speaking a West- 
Atlantic language and cultivating swamp-rice in tidal estuaries. The Baga, described 
by Paulme (1967) are patrilineal and patrilocal like the Diola and the Balanta. Out of 
eleven Baga settlements studied by Paulme, five had more than a thousand persons. 
Within these large settlements compounds are fairly independent, even though they 
are grouped into wards or quarters called ebane, each of which is made up of two or 
threefok, (equivalent to thefank or hank of the Diola) composed of agnates who claim 
to be related as 'brothers'. Alongside the original inhabitants, every Baga settlement 
harbours a number of  strangers (Fula, Manding, Wolof, Nalu,  etc.) dedicated to 
pastoral or commercial activities and leading completely independent lives. Among the 
Baga, as among the Diola, social unity depends more on territorial than on strictly 
genealogical criteria (Paulme 1967:262). Land, and rights over its disposition, rests 
almost totally with each individual male agnate; it is not corporate familial property. 
At the time of an elder's death his sons divide the land equally among themselves. As 
in Sambujat, Baga men prepare the fields, while women transplant, and both sexes 
harvest. 
To summarize, both Balanta and Baga, like the Kasa Diola, seem to occupy a refuge 
area, deep  in  the  swampy and  inaccessible coastal marigots. The  villages  they 
developed in relative isolation are composed of small quasi-kinship, spatially-defined 
groupings, highly egalitarian and atomistic, without any form of centralized authority 
or universalistic religion. The low level of segmentation at which land is held means 
that the conjugal family is the basic unit of production. Larger work groups can be 
recruited though ties of kinship or affinity, or by virtue of residence and age, to work 
the land at crucial points in the agricultural cycle. But people are not consistently 
recruited into formally organized groupings providing extra labour. 
Next  I will consider several societies from Guinea to Ivory Coast among whom 
upland rice is dominant. The first to be considered is a band of coastal peoples who 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DIOLA WET RICE CULTIVATION 

581 
speak languages belonging to the Mel group (Dalby 1965; Sapir 1971). Mel languages 
are spoken by three coastal Sierra Leonean societies (Sherbro, Bullom and Krim) who 
according to McCulloch (1950) might represent an old substratum, plus two others, 
Temne and Gola, who seem to be recent arrivals on the coast. The Temne migration to 
the coast dates from the mid 17th century and is responsible for separating the Bullom 
into  two  populations,  with  southern  Bullom  now  being  called  the  Sherbro 
(MacCormack 1977, p.  181). Besides these coastal groups, two other groups of Mel 
speakers (Kissi and Limba) are now (and probably in the past) located in the northern 
part of Sierra Leone, spilling over into adjacent countries. 
Of the aforementioned coastal groups, the best known are the Sherbro, (McCulloch 
1950, pp. 75-84; MacCormack 1977) whose history involves a series of invasions and 
more peaceful contacts with Mande-speaking peoples to the north. Contemporary 
Sherbro society is organized into nonunilineal, ranked descent groups that are known 
as ram. Members of high ranking ram (or ram de) reckon descent from the first 
founders and enjoy the status of 'owners' of the land and the prerogatives of chiefly 
office. In their political structure up to the Paramount Chief, the Sherbro seem to 
emphasize just those features taken over from the Mende and Temne  peoples. In 
describing Sherbro agriculture McCulloch mentions that slaves were occasionally 
called upon in the past to perform the onerous task of draining swamps and bringing 
them  into  rice production. The  ordinary work unit  is  now  the  small extended 
household, but outside help may always be recruited during the busier part of the 
season. Young people from one  or several villages band together into  a  compin 
('company') to work their fathers' fields in rotation, receiving money or goods as 
payment; or the village headman may organize a group to give extra assistance to 
farmers; or, instead, the ritual practitioner may recruit the young men belonging to a 
semi-secret society to do the harvesting; or, finally, boys belonging to the Poro society 
may be employed during specific periods (McCulloch 1950:78). 
Most Mel-speaking groups are relatively small, and at least before the colonial 
period relatively isolated. The  Temne,  however, are an exception. They  number 
upwards of a million people and occupy an area more than 26,000 square kms. Their 
crop is upland rice, but swamp farms have become common, especially around the 
Scarcies delta. The total Temne population is divided into approximately twenty-four 
non-localized  patriclans.  Each  patrician  descends  from  a  founding  ancestor 
(McCulloch 1950:54). Persons tracing descent from the first settlers in each chiefdom 
constitute the ruling house (or houses), from which the Paramount Chief is chosen. 
Each chiefdom's lands are nominally under the trusteeship of the chiefs, with actual 
rights of disposition over it being vested on the descendants of the original settlers who 
conquered the land. Temne production is based on the extended household, a co- 
resident  group  forming  a  cooperating domestic  unit  (Dorjahn  1977).  In  pre- 
Protectorate times, an extended household included many more people than it does 
today, and was in fact coterminous with the compound group. To  quote Dorjahn 
(1977: 109): 'Such a household formed a production and income unit, the head serving 
as administrator for the big farm on which most economically active persons in the 
household worked. The  head also pooled and administered certain income derived 
from enterprises other than farming, such as fishing, under some circumstances 
trading, bride-wealth payments, and so on.' In addition, particular individuals, or 
small family groups, made separate rice farms and kept the produce. In the  last 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DIOLA WET RICE CULTIVATION 

582 
decades, there has been a shift from large household farms to smaller individual farms. 
Several factors, among  them  the  dissolution of  domestic  slavery, seem  to  be 
responsible. But even now, rural Temne households are fairly large, averaging over 8 
persons. In his comparison with urban Temne, Dorjahn (1977:113) suggests: 'that it is 
the labor requirements of upland rice farming that are the prime factors in household 
size and type among the Mayoso Temne. The larger a households labour force, the 
more effectively it  can continue to  operate if  a  productive member is  absent or 
incapacitated or dies at a period of peak labour input, and the more widely the burden 
of supporting non-productive dependents, young and old, can be shared.' Thus, the 
head of the Temne farming household, faced with basic manpower problems, solves 
them in a number of ways, by attracting more productive people to the household, for 
example, or by enlisting the help of young men in exchange for gifts and rights to use 
extra land. A rich man can also secure the services of communal work groups, some of 
which can be very large indeed (more than 50 men), carefully structured, with an 
administrative head and elected officials. 
Around 1880 the Temne  introduced swamp rice cultivation into Sierra Leone 
(Mohr 1969). Nowadays swamp rice is grown in the area of the Scarcies, where groups 
of Temne have become specialized in  clearing lanes through the mangrove using 
techniques not too different from those of the Balanta, Baga and Diola. 
Like the Temne,  the Gola trace their origin to  northern Sierra Leone (Holsoe 
1979:63). They  are grouped into chiefdoms characterized by  a system of  ranked 
lineages. 'This involves a core lineage of a founding ancestor, its segments which are 
hierarchically arranged in accordance with distance from this ancestor, and numerous 
attached groupings. Degree of membership, rights to titles, property, and the use of 
lands is determined primarily with reference to position within the lineal system' 
(d'Azevedo 1962: 509). Gola households are fairly large, with a core of consanguineal 
kin to which are attached numerous other persons such as more distant kinsmen, 
affines, adopted children or, in the past, slaves. Incorporating extra persons within a 
domestic unit for the purpose of exploiting the land and increasing the labour of the 
group is a common practice. In this respect the Gola are not very different from other 
Sierra Leone societies. 
Let us now turn to two inland populations of West-Atlantic speakers. The Kissi of 
Guinea (Paulme 1970) are found in the Guinea area bordering on Sierra Leone to the 
west and Liberia to  the east. In  Sierra Leone there are about 35,000  Kissi,  and 
probably about the same number in  Liberia, with  the majority (140,000) in  the 
savanna country of upland Guinea. Population densities in Kissi land varies from 10 
person per km2 in the north to 19.6 persons per km2 in the south. All rice is rainfed, 
and grown without nurseries, transplanting or dikes to control irrigation. At least five 
types of cultivation systems are found in Kissi country, including swamp rice and 
shifting cultivation of upland or dry rice in forest or savanna fields used for five or six 
years and then fallowed for an equal amount of time. Men and women participate 
equally in agricultural work. 
The Kissi attach some importance to the post of village chief, and even more to the 
position of lineage elder. It is not uncommon for lineages to be five or six generations 
deep, and to be quite corporate. 'Les membres du lignage descendent tous par les 
hommes d'un meme ancetre, fondateur du village qu'ils habitent, ou premier du nom 
qui s'y soit installe' (Paulme 1970: 95). The lineage chief settles disputes within the 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DIOLA WET RICE CULTIVATION 

583 
group, distributes unused fields,  and helps with  miscellaneous finances. But his 
authority is moral rather than coercive, for there is no explicit structure of authority. 
The  second  of  the  Sierra Leonean,  Mel-speaking, dry  rice-growing peoples 
mentioned here, the  Limba (Finnegan 1965), seem  to  have been  more strongly 
influenced by the Manding. There should now be over 200,000 Limba spread over an 
area measuring 26,000 km2. In this country of low plateaus (120 m. or more above sea 
level), covered by savanna vegetation with patches of bush and grass, the Limba make 
their upland farms on the slopes of hills and also cultivate wet rice in freshwater 
swamps. 
The  Limba may be among the earliest inhabitants of Sierra Leone, having been 
found in 1500 where they are now (Kup 1960). Although still regarded as 'pagan' (for 
they drink palmwine and eat pork), the Limba have maintained a great deal of contact 
with  Muslim  Fula  and  Manding groups in  Guinea.  Their  southern chiefdoms 
resemble Temne ones, whereas the northern ones recall those of the Kuranko we will 
be discussing later on. Of Limba social institutions it may be summarily said that the 
eight or nine patrilineal, exogamous, nonlocalized Limba clans resemble those of the 
Temne, Manding, Kuranko, etc. who are their neighbours. Patrilineal ties define local 
groups (household, compound and village) and in turn control economic and ritual 
activities. It is important to note that the Limba bangka (or family) is an extended unit 
comprising close and distant kin, plus others who have attached themselves to the 
household head. Attached 'strangers' help with agricultural work and are paid in food 
and clothing. The entire group of kin and strangers lives together in one household. 
Several households form a compound, all members of which trace descent from a 
common great-grandfather and therefore regard each other as 'brothers'. Within the 
village or town, one kin group is said to 'own the village' by virtue of having descended 
from one of the village founders. The  relationship between a Limba chief and his 
people,  and  between  the  household  head  and  his  descendents, is  crucial  for 
understanding all aspects of production. 
Limba agriculture involves bush fallow cultivation of dry rice on hill-sides, with 
fallow periods lasting five to ten years, and a host of secondary crops. Freshwater 
swamp rice, grown by women as an extra source of revenue and food, is gaining in 
importance. Variations in  land tenure are pronounced between the  south, where 
individual and family holdings with strict boundaries predominate, and the north, 
where land is more abundant and not always divided among the individual owners. As 
Finnegan emphasizes, the concept of land 'ownership' does not necessarily imply 
exclusive rights of disposition. Thus, a chief is said to 'own' the land, but he cannot 
sell it; the leading village elder 'owns' the land, meaning that he must be notified when 
someone intends to cultivate a particular parcel. 'Ownership', then, is a system of rights 
and obligations expressed in social, political and ritual action as well as in material 
transactions. Finnegan (1965: 89) also points out that 'the native Limba concept of 
ownership involves rights over people and the product of their labour, aspects which are 
in most areas of more significance that the land itself, of which there seems to be 
plenty.' 
The Limba family farm is made jointly by the members of one household under the 
direction of an elder who is said to 'own' both house and farm. Household members 
cultivate together and own the product in common. When the head of the household 
dies, his sons inherit the farm and go on sharing it. Hence, land is vested on the family 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DIOLA WET RICE CULTIVATION 

584 
unit as a whole, and is normally indivisible. In addition to a share in the family farm, a 
younger son may also be given a piece of land on the side, to cultivate for his own 
individual family's use. Strangers who have settled in an area may eventually gain 
rights to land, especially if they marry into a local group. A woman may have a farm, 
which she carves out with permission of her husband, usually in a swamp within the 
land owned by him and his group. In general, upland rice farms are under the charge 
of men, with women tending the swamp farms and growing many of the secondary 
crops. 
It has already been mentioned that the basic Limba farming unit is the extended 
household. Another way of increasing the household labour-force is by manipulating 
affinal ties: a man is entitled to receive help from those to whom he has given sisters 
and daughters. The  chief can also mobilize extra help by activating  cognatic and 
affinal ties, as well as by recalling political obligations. The  most effective way of 
coping with tasks requiring a large and fairly predictable labour force (clearing and 
burning the bush, for example) remains the institution of 'compins' (kune). These 
involve groups of twenty or thirty youngsters who band together and systematically 
hoe (the boys), or weed (the girls), in rotation, in each of their fathers' farms. In other 
Sierra Leonean areas, 'modern' companies tend to be even more structured, and to 
provide their members not only with labour services but with credit and welfare as 
well. They also allocate their extra time to working for non-members in payment for 
cash5. Each Limba household must contribute a young member for an effective claim 
to be made on the 'compin's' services. This type of cooperative work, accompanied by 
singing and drumming, tends to break down in the cities, but is still widely practised 
in the countryside. 
In a study of the Safroko Limba of the Makeni area, Moseley (1979: 28) found that 
'compins' accounted for 98 per cent of all outside labour employed by household 
heads, contributing 117 workdays per acre of upland rice. However, rice growing in 
family farms is being supplanted in some areas by groundnut farming, which involves 
less labour. Similarly, upland household farms are loosing ground to farms made by 
women. Nonetheless, to a surprising extent (especially when compared with the more 
'atomistic' Diola), Limba households are large, integrated, cooperative units with 
formal and clearcut mechanisms for recruiting extra labour through kinship and 
quasi-kinship arrangements and 'company' work. 
Of the second category of people to be mentioned in  this comparative section, 
namely the Mande-speaking rice-growing groups in Sierra Leone and Liberia, the best 
known are probably the Mende who number more than two million (Little 1948, 
1951, 1967; McCulloch 1950; Grace 1977; Njoku 1979; Isaac 1980). Rice is the main 
food of the Mende, and most of it is grown in upland farms; rice grown in swamps was 
then regarded as a supplementary female activity, though it is now more popular. The 
farming household, or mawei, has a very characteristic form and function. In the old 
days, the mawei had a head, whose sons inherited his estate, which was worked by 
slaves captured in war. Today the basis of the farming household is the conjugal 
family. However, many additional members are recruited from among junior brothers, 
their wives and numerous other dependents, including strangers, so that some mawei 
can be very large indeed. The members live together during the busiest periods of the 
farming season. As Little (1948: 42) points out: 'To  some extent, therefore, social 
arrangements in connection with farming in Mende country today recapitulate the 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DIOLA WET RICE CULTIVATION 

585 
general structure and organisation of earlier times . . . One obvious difference is that 
the place of the slaves is now taken by the dependents, paid work people, and junior 
relatives of the head of the household. The term mawei survives, but it has a somewhat 
different meaning, if only for this reason. It is applied, nowadays, as a rule, only to 
those farming households which fulfil certain criteria as to size and the social status of 
their head. One such stipulation is that the owner of a mawei, or mawei mui, as he is 
termed, should possess at least four wives.' Obviously, the Mende household is larger, 
more structured and more hierarchical than the Diola household. For example, the 
mawei mui has the right to demand that palm fruits be collected, that his house be re- 
built and that other household members hunt and fish for him. In addition, he settles 
disputes, rules over domestic affairs, and even fines members who transgress. To 
recruit extra labour, he relies on the husbands of his daughters and other affines. In 
short, access to land, and the right to occupy and farm it, is vested among the Mende in 
certain families or descent groups identified with the first settlers (Little 1967: 82). 
Persons descended from the founding families clearly enjoy a higher status than do 
subsequent settlers and newcomers, whose forefathers may have been at one time or 
another domestic slaves (Grace 1977). According to Njoku (1979), the mean size of 
the Mende farming household has decreased by roughly 60-75% over the last thirty years. 
In 1944-1946 Little's data showed that households averaged 24 persons; in 1971 Njoku 
found the average to be only 6.5 persons. He attributes this dramatic decline to the 
neglect of polygyny and the assertion by younger men of their independence from their 
parents and  'big  men'.  This  independence is  expressed by  setting up  separate 
residences and separate farms (Njoku 1979: 118). Not surprisingly, as the household 
shrinks in size the reliance on extra-household communal labour increases. Farmers 
band together to perform special reciprocal operations; or they engage the services of 
an organized group, usually paid in kind. Another source of extra labour described by 
Njoku is hired labour paid in cash by task or by day. Finally, there is the labour-gang 
(or 'company'). As among the Sherbro, Limba and other Sierra Leonean groups, the 
Mende 'companies' (kugbe) are comprised of young men who perform work in rotation 
for their immediate families; they may also hire their services out in exchange for food 
or cash. 'Companies' are formally organized, with a headman, a treasurer, and a 
musician. Njoku emphasizes the greater relative importance of male hired as over 
communal labour. 
The Kuranko, numbering about 125,000, occupy the Guinea Highlands in upper 
Sierra Leone and southern Guinea, a country rugged, isolated and covered by the 
characteristic savanna-woodland vegetation (Jackson, 1977). Population densities do 
not exceed 65 persons per km2, except in the southeast. As with the other neighbouring 
groups, land is 'owned' by the Paramount Chief, who settles land-boundary disputes. 
These occur despite the ready availability of land. Jackson (1977: 8-14) describes the 
upland rice farm and its associated labour force. Because a single household cannot 
meet the labour demands required in clearing and burning secondary bush, large 
numbers of men from the village are organized by age sets or simply friendship into 
reciprocating cooperative groups called kere, also  involved in  discharging affinal 
obligations and duties to the chief. Clearly, these kere groups are constituted in very 
much the same way as the Limba and Mende 'companies'. 
Another Mande-speaking group of  rice growers in  Sierra Leone, the Yalunka, 
number about 30,000 and are located in the northeast corner of the country (Donald 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DIOLA WET RICE CULTIVATION 

586 
1970). The territory occupied by Yalunka chiefdoms is 30 to 600 meters in elevation. 
Here the Yalunka have created two kinds of rice farms, one in upland areas and 
another, the so-called swamp farms, in low-lying, occasionally flooded alluvial valleys. 
Although the formal household is small (5.8 person only), its labour force is augmented 
by numerous other dependents, both kin and strangers, who do some work and receive 
some services in  return. If  additional labour is  stil  needed, other descent group 
members, neighbours or affines, may also cooperate in the farming. Large work parties 
are more common, according to Donald, in upland farms than in swamp farms. This is 
an important point we will be coming back to later on. What needs to be emphasized 
here is that most Mende-Temne speakers of Sierra Leone rely on the household unit, 
which in some cases can be very large indeed, for cooperative work on communal 
farms. This  is even true for the Yalunka, among whom mechanical cultivation of 
swamp rice has become widespread. 
The same emphasis on enlarging the household unit to cope with production exists 
among Liberian groups such as the Kpelle, described by Gibbs (1978) and Bledsoe 
(1976, 1980)6, the Loma (or Toma), and the Ma (or Mano). The 70,000 Loma studied 
by Currens (1979) occupy the upper Lofa County where the land is relatively flat and 
fertile, and comparatively abundant. The traditional system of land tenure is similar to 
that of other Mande-speakers. Land is vested in the descendants of the town or village 
founders who  are regarded as  'owners of  the  land'.  In  point  of  fact,  however, 
community land is  not allocated to  'outsiders' by  the  'owners', nor is  it  divided 
according to kinship grouping, but is widely available to any of its citizens. As Currens 
points out, this situation results from the abundance of cultivable land. Fallow periods 
last a minimum of ten years. 
Rather than being land-limited, the Loma system, like that of the Kpelle and other 
neighbouring shifting cultivators, seems to be labour-limited. The household is not a 
self-sustaining production unit; it must rely on outside labour for work in the upland 
rice farms. As with most other Mande-speaking peoples, extra help is obtained through 
cooperative work groups, kinship ties, and migrant labour. In some areas, such groups 
are small and informally organized; in others, they are more structured and larger. In 
all areas, however, household production is still geared to family consumption and not 
sale. 
Turning now to the Gbannah Ma of north Central Liberia (referred to here by the 
name Mano), they, also, are mostly upland rice cultivators, though swamp rice is 
becoming very important (Riddell 1979). Prior to the 16th century the Mano were 
living to the north in a totally different environment (Riddell 1979). Following the 
breakup of the Mali empire, the non-Islamic Mano, together with their neighbours the 
Kpelle, Dan, etc., moved south into the tropical forest, where they changed drastically 
their methods of production. In this new context, Mano communities remained more 
or less isolated from domination by the savanna states to the north. Here, in the 
tropical forest, they developed a whole set of  subsistence strategies described by 
Riddell as the 'traditional economy'. Mano communities are composed of patrilineages 
organized into sibs that are corporate, exogamous, localized and non-hierarchical. To 
overcome the  problem of  limited labour supply, the  Mano  have developed two 
organizations: the  domestic group and  reciprocal labour cooperatives. Domestic 
groups or households as described by Riddell are filiolocal units organized around an 
elder's son. Within a community, households exchange labour in a balanced form of 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DIOLA WET RICE CULTIVATION 

587 
reciprocity based on recruitment through agnation and affinity. In addition, household 
labour can be increased through pawnship and clientship as described by Riddell 
(1979:  126).  Labour cooperatives, on  the  other hand,  are traditional voluntary 
associations involving male or females organized by a senior man or woman of the sib. 
All adult men or women of the community should belong to at least one cooperative, 
which  seldom numbers more than 30  persons. Traditional labour arrangements, 
however, are changing fast due to the absorption of the Mano into the industrial 
economy of Liberia. 

CONCLUSIONS 

In the first section of this paper, I tried to document the manner in which social and 
productive relations co-vary among three Diola villages of southern Senegal. Located 
less than 80 km apart, the villages are representative of broad cultural patterns in three 
ecologically contrasting regions (Kasa,  Kajaamutay and  Tangori)  in  the  Basse 
Casamance. A rapid summary of the history of Diola expansion and conversion to 
Islam under the  influence of  neighbouring Manding suggests the possibility that 
Sambujat, Jipalom and Fatiya may represent different stages in the developmental 
cycle  of  village  formation.  Speaking  rather  abstractly, this  would  involve  a 
transformation from a Sambujat-like situation to a Jipalom-like situation through a 
stage like Fatiya's. In reality, however, the institutional contrasts I have discussed seem 
to be  rooted in  non-reversible social structural and economic changes suffered by 
Fatiya, and to a lesser extent by Jipalom, under a pervasive ideology borrowed from 
the Manding and sanctioned by Islam. Thus, the villages reflect in microcosm some of 
the general differences distinguishing the social organization of rice production among 
'pagan' versus Islamised societies further down the Guinea Coast. 
Although a great deal of variation exists among Mande speakers who cultivate 
upland rice by shifting bush-fallow techniques, there is also a great deal of cultural 
similarity. With reference to the variables we have been considering, most Mande 
speakers, as well as the groups they have influenced, are characterized by formal social 
classes, including, in the past, domestic slaves engaged in agriculture, a centralized 
authority based on chiefs, and lineages that are ranked in such a way that founding 
lineages 'own' the  land and distribute it  to  strangers. The  Mande household is 
usually large and formally structured. It is incumbent upon its head to distribute the 
fields and to recruit extra members to the household in semi-permanent positions. The 
composition of the household seems to be related not only to the need for a large labour 
force engaged in clearing and planting upland rice, but also to the dictates of Islam, 
which encourage asymmetrical status relations and prescribed social or religious roles, 
such as those of village chief or ritual practitioner (alimam), formalized relationships 
within the lineage members, and polygynous households. It has also been suggested (P. 
Richards, personal communication) that  large work-groups or  'companies' have 
emerged among upland rice cultivators in Sierra Leone and Liberia as a replacement 
for the labour once provided by slaves. In any case, where they exist, 'companies' seem 
to  be  well  organized, large, homogeneous groups, providing assistance to  their 
members and their families in a predictable, disciplined manner. 
In  contrast, the  traditional 'pagan' (non-Mandingized) societies  of  the  Basse 
Casamance, Guine-Bissau, and coastal Guinea are less hierarchical. It is by no means 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DIOLA WET RICE CULTIVATION 

588 
clear to what extent these societies participated in slave raiding during the 19th century. 
Whether they were victims or profiteers of the slave trade, the Kasa Diola, Balanta and 
Baga retain few if any traces of former slave status. The non-Islamised sectors of these 
societies are also characterized by an absence of ranked lineages and of any tradition 
whereby the descendents of the founding families own the village lands. Landholding 
among these societies takes place at low levels of lineage segmentation. The conjugal 
family, rather than any more extensive unit, holds rights of disposition over its land. 
Thus,  even though heads of  households occasionally cultivate together, and hold 
residual rights to fields, all de facto control over the land is in the hands of conjugal 
families. Households are usually made up  of  agnatically related men,  with  few 
strangers present. This means that extra labour to work the fields must be recruited on 
an ad hoc and informal basis, through cognatic ties. 
For the Diola, becoming 'like the Manding' involves several developments: first, an 
increased social differentiation, such as between men and women,  marabout and 
chief, craft specialist and farmer, and above all, descendents of the village founders and 
more recent settlers. Secondly, with  Mandingization, a  shift has  occurred, from 
extended households occupying the  same enormous house (the  Sambujat hank), 
sharing ritual but few economic functions (conjugal families in a hank usually cultivate 
apart), to smaller household units (the Jipalom and Fatiya fank), occupying separate 
houses around a courtyard but nonetheless cooperating often in the agricultural work. 
It is common for one or two Fatiya brothers, and perhaps their father also, to cultivate 
and fallow their upland groundnut and millet fields together; similarly, co-wives, and 
in some cases mothers and daughters, regularly work together in the swamp rice fields 
of Fatiya. A third trend from a Sambujat to a Fatiya situation has been the creation of 
two totally separate farming systems (Linares 1970), wherein men work on cash crops 
and keep the revenues, while women work on the subsistence crop and feed the family. 
Finally, authority roles have become more secular and explicit. Whereas in Sambujat 
moral order is maintained within the village indirectly by those elders who control a 
number of powerful, disease-inflicting spirits (the bakiin), in Fatiya it is the chief of the 
village, also the head of the groundnut cooperative, who punishes transgressors by 
referring them to governmental authorities. In this role, the Fatiya chief is backed up 
by other heads of households belonging to the founding lineages. The marabout, on the 
other hand, mainly cures diseases and enforces compliance with Islam. Although it is 
impossible to generalize without doing an injustice to complex phenomena, it does 
seem to be the case that among the Diola the process of 'Mandingization' involves a 
concomitant change in social and economic relations. The  question to ask next is 
whether changes in such phenomena as household size responds mainly to ecological- 
economic necessities or are, instead, more closely linked with cultural and ideological 
forces. 
In an important article writen some years ago, Netting (1965) argues, using as an 
example the Kofyar of Northern Nigeria, that the small independent family household 
is well adapted to the labour needs of intensive agriculture requiring constant attention 
by small groups, whereas the more extended household is better suited to shifting 
cultivation requiring large numbers of persons to complete the work while conditions 
are favourable. The extended family, with more than one conjugal unit, is rare among 
the 'intensive' Kofyar of the Jos Plateau. Neighbouring groups, practising extensive 
shifting cultivaton, have households consistently larger in size, averaging 10 to  14 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DIOLA WET RICE CULTIVATION 

589 
members. Kofyar, who have moved in the recent years from hills to the extensive 
plains below, show an increase in polygynous families (61% compared to 45% in the 
traditional villages) and in  extended households (from an average of  3.35  to  4.23 
adults). 
Despite  his  convincing  data,  Netting's  ecological  argument  has  not  gone 
unchallenged. In a review of family and household organization, Yanagisako (1979) 
begins by questioning the dichotomous classification of whole societies into those with 
'extended family household' versus those with 'independent family households'. Not 
only do such notions confuse the categories 'household' (or people who live together) 
with 'family' (or people who are kin), but they also obscure the immense diversity of 
domestic arrangements actually in existence. Authors who have concentrated on the 
relations between household and labour are taken to  task for failing to  explain 
adequately, 'that it is not merely the technological requirements of production which 
necessitate a particular household type, but the entire manner in which production is 
socially  organized' (Yanagisako 1979:  174).  Theoretically at  least,  a  particular 
production could be accomplished by a number of different units deriving from the 
prior existence of cultural rules organizing production. 
It  is  difficult to  believe that household size  and labour requirements are not 
somehow causally related. Nonetheless, among the Diola, household units defined on 
the basis of co-residence are much larger in  Sambujat than in Fatiya. This  is the 
reverse of what would be expected since Sambujat's agricultural system appears to be 
the more intensive. In any case, in both villages, cultural norms stress individual 
family self-sufficiency, so that agricultural production is in the hands of the conjugal 
family and immediate kin. Still, reliance on larger labour work groups outside the 
household is as crucial at certain times in the agricultural year as among the Mande- 
speaking upland rice farmers we have been discussing. The size of this extra-household 
work group may be smaller in intensive versus extensive agricultural societies, but this 
contrast seems less important than the  manner in  which production is  culturally 
organized in both types of societies. In 'hierarchical', lineage-based, ex-slave-owning 
state societies like the Mande, asymmetrical status relations constitute the cultural 
premise upon which political and labour demands are made. High-ranking individuals, 
such as households heads and chiefs, have the moral power to demand and enforce 
participation in work groups such as the companys. That these relationships may 
involve an element of coercion is implied by authors who argue that 'companies' may 
in fact serve as substitues for work previously performed by slaves. 
In contrast, it would be unthinkable for any Diola to belong to work groups whose 
membership is  formally organized and obligatory rather than ad hoc and context- 
specific. Diola work groups are recruited through persuasion and compromise, rather 
than  through obligation and  compulsion.  To  label  both  kinds  of  groups,  the 
'companies' and the  sikufas, simply as reciprocal labour units is  to  confuse two 
different cultural phenomena. Similarly, the quality of conjugal relations, and the 
behavioural correlates surrounding the  so-called 'nuclear family' are qualitatively 
different in Sambujat, and even Jipalom, from Fatiya and other Islamised villages. In 
the first two villages, conjugal relations are fairly egalitarian; women have rights of 
disposition over the rice crop, even though they many not own the land. In Fatiya, 
however, women's submission to the authority of their husbands, and their lack of 
participation in wider economic cash cropping endeavours, is sanctioned by Islam and 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

being Compared 

TABLE 6 A comparison of swamp cultivation (man-hours, yields and area planted) among the Diola and some of their neighbours 
Society 
Diola (Jipalom)' 
Loma (Lawalazu)2 
1971-1972 
Liberia (all)3 
Gambia (Saruya4 
Mandinka) 
= one  acre 
'My  data 
2Currens 1979, tables 2,  4 pp.  87,  91 

.89 
.85 
.81 
'Van Santeen  1975,  tables 4,  p.  36; p.  28 
4Dey  1980,  table  1 p.  42; p.  9 
5Plus about one hectare in  groundnuts 

Cultivation 
System 
Swamp 
Upland 
Upland 
Swamp 
Swamp 

Man-Hounrs 
M-n-Hniir7 
a-u--- 
528 
546 
504 
480 
? 

4,375  m2 
4,047  m2* 
4,047  m2 
4,047  m2 
4,047  m2 

Yields: kg. 
Paddrv  ner  hn 
ch 
---: 
1300-1500 
1090-1404 

Total Number of 
-- 

1,121 
1,569 
2,016 

* 

= 

^"- 

. 

- 
> 

- 

1_  _ 
_2. 

Area 

udLacres) 

Area Cultivated by one Family 
/kh^-tar-\ 
iLaLva) 
.605-1135 
1.26-1.54 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DIOLA WET RICE CULTIVATION 

591 
by the all-pervasive ideology of an imported ranked social system they have begun to 
develop. 
Finally, a convincing argument could be made that differences in the agricultural 
system of traditional 'pagans' vs. Mande-speakers reside more in the cultural usage to 
which the land is put, and in the access and transmission of rights to property, than 
with demography (Table 1) or the productive process itself. In fact, I have tried to 
show (Table 6) that the amount of area cultivated, the number of work days and the 
yields per unit-area of swamp-rice (rainfed) in Jipalom (from where I have adequate 
data) is not too different from that of upland rice farmers elsewhere in West Africa. 
To conclude, it seems necessary to avoid simplifying complex social institutions: the 
'reasons' for a particular mode of production are as much the result of non-quantifiable 
cultural 'rules' and attitudes as of historical forces and ecological 'imperatives'. It 
simply cannot be coincidental that groups who develop in isolation, in villages deep 
within the mangrove swamps and estuaries of the Upper Guinea coast, away from 
trading states or warring chiefdoms characteristics of their Sudanic neighbours to the 
north, have acephalous politics and territorially-based social systems. As the history of 
the  Diola  seems to  suggest, the  spread of  these  peoples into  a  riverine, coastal 
environment, was accomplished gradually by small groups splitting off from several 
parent villages, setting up new households, and forging new villages on the basis of a 
common agnatic ideology. Penetration of a certain area by small groups originating in 
several villages would logically result in agglomerations whose component households 
are  tied  together by  the  realities of  propinquity, rather than  by  genealogical 
recollection. A very different historical process seems to have been involved when 
warring chiefdoms and  state-organized societies,  like  the  Mande,  expanded and 
colonized new regions. Colonization of vast, lightly populated areas by  territorial 
conquest and subjugation resulted in  such  legitimizing factions as  high-ranking 
lineages, descended from first founders, owning all the land and being entitled to the 
labour of others. Thus, it may not be the case that shifting cultivation requires larger 
work groupings for, as we have seen, among the Diola, transplanting and harvesting 
often demand extra-household help. What seems crucial in rank and status-conscious 
societies is that lineages or household heads are able to 'command' large numbers of 
dependents, or to  engage extra hands when  needed; indeed their legitimacy and 
prestige depends upon being able to do so. This, then, may be the essential difference 
between Mande societies and the more egalitarian and 'atomistic' Diola. 

NOTES 

A type of cultivation known as swamp rice, 'grown in hollows or depressions whic'  remain partly or 
wholly under water for the whole season' (McCulloch 1950: 9) is being encouraged by the governments of 
Sierra Leone and Liberia in recent decades. In the Makeni area of northern Sierra Leone, more than half 
the households are exclusive swamp rice cultivators (P. Richards, personal communication). In the Scarcies 
Rivers of  coastal Sierra Leone, swamp rice has been grown since the  1880s mostly by  the  Temne. 
According to Mohr (1969: 84), rice is here cultivated on level plains without poldering or dikes to control 
the flow of tides. 
Swamp rice seems to date from at least the 18th century in the Gambia. Like upland rice it has always 
been cultivated and controlled by women. 'Women rely primarily on their own labour . This  may be 
supplemented in certain conditions by other forms of labour which may be purely additional . . .'  (Dey 
n.d. p. 22). 
In this paper I have paid little attention to inland swamp rice cultivation because, very few authors, with 
the exception of Dey, have given it the importance it deserves. Ethnographic descriptions of this system are 
thus few and far between. 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DIOLA  WET  RICE  CULTIVATION 

592 
2 This article is based on approximately 30 months of field research among the Diola, in 1961, 1964-66, 
1970, and 1976-77. I am grateful to the National Science Foundation, the Wenner-Gren Foundation, and 
the Smithsonian Institution for financial support. The earlier help of J. D. Sapir in the mapping of rice 
fields, and his  generous sharing of  the  Diola data, are gratefully acknowledged. M.  H.  Moynihan's 
perceptive observations of the Diola natural and social environments made the 1976-77 trip a success. R. 
McC. Netting and E. Goody read an earlier draft of this paper and greatly improved it; many of their 
comments have been incorporated in the text. My  research would have been impossible without the 
enlightened cooperation of the Senegalese authorities. In particular I should like to thank the Institut 
Fondamental d'Afrique Noire for permission to work in the Basse Casamance during the first stints in the 
fields and the Delegation Generale a la Recherche for the formal work permit extended to me in 1976-77. 
O.R.S.T.O.M.  generously provided lodgings and a place to work while in and near Dakar. The actual 
writing of this piece was done at the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, and the Center for Advanced 
Study in the Behavioural Sciences. I should like to dedicate this article to the memory of my loyal friend 
and able assistant, K. Badji of Falmare. 
3 Netting, Cleveland and Stier (n.d.: 1) define intensive cultivation as 'that system of agricultural land 
use in which fields are planted with crops for longer periods of years than they are allowed to remain 
unfarmed or  fallow.  The  most  intensive  system would  keep  the  same field  in  permanent, annual 
production'. From this definition it is clear that 'intensity' has nothing to do with actual yields. As Haswell 
(1963: 10) remarks: 'In considering the economics of cultural practices, yields per acre are by no means all 
important.' In fact, it is possible that yields per unit area, or per work-day, are higher in some shifting 
systems than in others I am calling intensive. 
4  Unfortunately, most coastal peoples growing tidal wet-rice intensively for hundred of years are isolated 
in what was until recently politically difficult territory for anthropologists and students of agronomic 
practices. Some societies located in Guinea Bissau and the coastal stretch of Guinea, have been described 
by Portuguese and French scholars, but their writings have been consistently slighted, or simply ignored, 
by English-speaking anthropologists. 
5On the institution of the Limba kune, see further the contribution of Johnny, Karimu and Richards. 
6  A thorough discussion of the 'wealth in-people system' among the Kpelle is found in Bledsoe (1980). 
Rights in women and children, according to Bledsoe, are used by powerful men and elders to lure young 
men as extra labourers. Although her argument is interesting it  is contradicted in places by her own 
examples, which show that Kpelle women have a fair amount of power. (A more detailed discussion of this 
point is being developed in Linares, 'The Diola Territorial Marriage', in preparation). 

REFERENCES 

d'Azevedo, W. L.  1962 'Common principles of variant kinship structures among the Gola of 
Bledsoe, C.  1976  'Women's marital strategies among the  Kpelle  of  Liberia.' Journal of 

Western Liberia'. American Anthropologist 64 (3): 504- 520 
Anthropological Research 32 (4): 372- 389. 
-  1980 Women and Marriage in Kpelle Society. Stanford: Stanford University Press 
Carreira, A.  1961 'Organizacao social e ec6nomica dos povos da Guine Portuguesa'. Boletim 
Cultural da Guine Portuguesa 16 (64): 641-736 
Carreira, A. and A. M. de Meireles 1960 'Quelques notes sur les mouvements migratoires des 
populations de la province portugaise da Guin6e'. Bull. de l'IFAN, 22 (3-4): 379-392 
Currens, G. E. 1979 'Land, labor and capital in Loma agriculture', in V. R. Dorjahn and B. L. 
Isaac (eds.), 79-102 
Dalby, David  1965 'The  Mel  languages: a reclassification of  Southern "West Atlantic".' 
African Language Studies 6: 1- 17 
Dey, J. n.d. 'The socio-economic organization of farming in the Gambia and its relevance for 
agricultural development  planning.'  Overseas  Development  Institute,  Agricultural 
Administration Network Papers 7: 1-42 
Donald. L.  1970 'Food production by the Yalunka household, Sierra Leone', in  P.  F. M. 
McLoughlin (ed.), African Food Production Systems. Baltimore: The  Johns Hopkins 
University Press, 165-191 
Dorjahn, V. R.  1977 'Temne household size and composition: rural changes over time and 
rural-urban differences.' Ethnology 16 (2): 105-127 
Dorjahn,  V.  R.  and  B.  L.  Isaac (eds.)  1979  Essays  in  Economic Anthropology  of  Liberia  and 
Sierra Leone. Philadelphia; Liberian Studies Association. 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DIOLA WET RICE CULTIVATION 

295-312 
Guini Portuguesa 4 (14): 197-232 
Monte, Archipels). See under Th. Monod 1951 

593 
Dresch, J.  1949 'La riziculture en  Afrique Occidentale.' Annales de Geographie 312  (53): 
Espirito Santo, J. 1949 'Notas sobre a cultura do arroz entre os Balantas'. Boletim Cultural da 
Fernandes, Valentim 1506-1507 Description de la Cote Occidentale d'Afrique (Senegal au Cap de 
Finnegan, R. H. 1965 Survey of the Limba Peoples of Northern Sierra Leone. London: H.M.S.O. 
Gibbs, J. L. Jr. (ed.) 1978 Peoples of Africa (abridged edition). New York: Holt, Rinehart and 
Winston. 
Goody, J. (ed.) 1958 The Development Cycle in Domestic Groups. Cambridge University Press 
for  Department  of  Archaeology and  Anthropology (Cambridge Papers  in  Social 
Anthropology, 1) 
--- 
1971 Technology, Tradition and the State in Africa. London: Oxford University Press for 
the International African Institute 
-  1976  Production and Reproduction. A  Comparative Study of  the Domestic Domain. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 
Grace, J. L. 1977 'Slavery and emancipation among the Mende in Sierra Leone, 1896-1928', 
in S. Miers and I. Kopytoff (eds.), Slavery in Africa. Madison: University of Wisconsin 
Press, 415-431 
Gray, R. F.  1963  The Sonjo of  Tanganyika: an Anthropological Study of an Irrigation-based 
Society. London: Oxford University Press for the International African Institute 
Haswell, M. R. 1963 The Changing Pattern of Economic Activity in a Gambia Village. London: 
H.M.S.O. 
Holsoe, S .E. 1979 'Economic activities in the Liberian area: the pre-European period to 1900', 
in V. R. Dorjahn and B. L. Isaac (eds.) 63-78 
Isaac, B. L. 1980 'Female fertility and marital form among the Mende of rural Upper Bambara 
Chiefdom, Sierra Leone'. Ethnology 19 (3): 297-313 
Jackson, M. 1977 The Kuranko. New York: St. Martin's Press 
Kup, A. P. 1960 'An account of the tribal distribution of Sierra Leone', Man 156: 116-119 
Lauer, J. J. 1969 Rice in the History of the Lower Gambia-Geba Area. University of Wisconsin, 
M. A. thesis 
Leary,  F.  A.  1971  'The  role  of  the  Mandinka in  the  islamization of  the  Casamance, 
1850-1911',  in  C.  T.  Hodge  (ed.),  Papers on  the Manding. Bloomington: Indiana 
University Publications, African Series, 3: 227-248 
Linares, O.  F.  1970 'Agriculture and Diola society', in P. McLoughlin (ed.), African Food 
Production Systems. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 194-227 
-- 
1980 'Social spatial and temporal relations: Diola villages in archaeological perspective.' 
Wenner Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research. In Press 
Little, K. L. 1948 'The Mende farming household.' The Sociological Review 40 (4): 37-56 
--- 
1951 'The Mende rice farm and its cost'. Zaire 5 (3): 227-273 
--- 
1967 The Mende of Sierra Leone: a West African People in Transition. London: Routledge 
and Kegan Paul 
MacCormack, C.  P.  1977 'Wono: institutionalized dependency in  Sherbro descent groups 
(Sierra Leone)' in S. Miers and I. Kopytoff(eds.), Slavery in Africa. Madison: University 
of Wisconsin Press, 181-203 
McCulloch, M.  1950 The Peoples of Sierra Leone Protectorate (Ethnological Survey of Africa, 
Western Africa, 2). London: International African Institute. 
Mark, P. A.  1976 Economic and Religious Change among the Diola of Boulouf (Casamance), 
1890-1940:  Trade, Cash Cropping and Islam in Southwestern Senegal. Yale University, 
Ph.D. dissertation 
Mohr, B.  1969 Die Reiskultur in  Westafrika. Munich: Weltforum Verlag for IFO-Inst. fur 
Wirtschaftsforschung (Afrika-Studien, 44) 
Monod, Th., A. Teixeira da Mota and R. Mauny (eds.) 1951 Description de la Cote Occidentale 
d'Afrique ...  by V. Fernandes. Bissau: Centro de Estudos da Guin6 Portuguesa, no. 11 
Moseley, K. P. 1979 'Land, labour and migration: the Safroko Limba case', Africana Research 
Bulletin 8, (2-3). 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DIOLA WET RICE CULTIVATION 

594 
Netting, R. McC.  1965 'Household organization and intensive agriculture: the Kofyar case'. 
Africa 35 (4), 422-429 
-- 
1968 Hill Farmers of Nigeria: Cultural Ecology of the Kofyar of the Jos Plateau. Seattle: 
University of Washington Press 
Netting, R. Mc., D. Cleveland and F. Stier n.d. 'The conditions of agricultural intensification 
in the West African savannah'. AID, Contract REDSO/WA 78-142; A Sahelian Social 
Development Paper 
Njoku, A. 0.  1979 'The economics of Mende upland rice farming', in V. R. Dorjahn and B. L. 
Isaac (eds.) 63-78 
Paulme, Denise  1957 'Des  riziculteurs africains: les  Baga (Guinee francaise)'. Les Cahiers 
d'Outre-Mer 10: 257-278 
- 
1970 Les gens du riz. Les Kissi de Haute-Guinee. Paris: Librairie Plon 
Pelissier, P.  1966 Les paysans du Senegal. Les civilisations agraires du Cayor a la Casamance. 
Saint-Yrieix: Impr. Fabregue 
Porteres, R.  1962 'Berceaus agricoles primaires sur le continent africain'. Journal of African 
History 3 (2): 195-210 
Riddell, J. C.  1979 'The  Gbannah Ma (Mano) in two economies: dynamics of finite-labor 
economics', in V. R  Dorjahn and B. L. Isaac (eds.), 121-140 
Sapir, J. D. 1965 A Grammar of Diola-Fogny: a Language Spoken in the Basse-Casamance Region 
of Senegal. London: Cambridge University Press 
- 
1970 'Kujaama: symbolic separation among the Diola-Fogny.' American Anthroplogist 
72(6): 1330-1348 
- 
1971 'West Atlantic: an inventory of  the  languages, their noun class, systems and 
consonant alternation', in T.A. Sebeok (ed.), Current Trends in Linguistics 7:45-112 
Schloss, M.  R.  1979  The Hatchet's Blood: Spirits and Society among the Ehing of Senegal. 
University of Virginia, Ph. D. dissertation 
Service de  la  Statistique et  de  la  Documentation, Republique du  Senegal,  1964,  1972 
'Repertoire des Villages'. Dakar 
Smith, M. G. 1956 'On segmentary lineage systems'. JRAI 86(2): 39-80 
Teixeira da Mota, A.  1950 'A agricultura de Brames e Balantas vista atraves da fotografia 
aerea.' Boletim Cultural da Guine Portuguesa 5 (17): 131-172 
- 
1951 'Notas sobre o povoamento e agricultural indigena na Guine Portguesa.' Boletim 
Cultural de Guine Portuguesa 23: 657-680. 
Thomas. L.-V. 1959 Les Diola. Dakar: Mem. IFAN 55, vols. 1-2. 
Van Santeen, C. E.  1975 'Some notes on smallholder rice production in Liberia', in Socio- 
Weil, P. M. 1973 'Wet rice, women, and adaption in the Gambia'. RuralAfricana 19: 20-28 
Yanagisako, S. J. 1979 'Family and household: the analysis of domestic groups.' Annual Review 

Economic Aspects of Rice Cultivation in West Africa. 

of Anthropology 8: 161-205 

Resume 

de la riziculture inondee chez les Diolas du Senegal 

Des bas-fonds du littoral aux vallees de l'interieur: l'organisation sociale 
Voici une etude comparative sur l'organisation sociale liee a la riziculture en terrains inondes, 
entre trois villages Diolas, representant chacun une region ecologiquement differente, situes en 
Basse Casamance, au Senegal. Bien que leur eloignement respectif ne depasse pas 80 kms., ces 
villages different nettement sur le plan social et politique, celui du droit foncier et de la division 
par sexe du travail. L'importance relative de l'Islam et des ideologies qui insistent sur des 
rapports asymetriques de rang et de statut est plus prononcee parmi les Diola influences par les 
Mandingues, que parmi les groupes Diolas, plus isoles, des zones cotieres. 
Les differences de rapports de production entre les riziculteurs Diolas des marecages du 
littoral et les groupes islamises de l'interieur se retrouvent aussi dans le contraste que l'on 
constate entre quelques groupes "patens" et groupes de la c6te guineenne parlant Mande. Les 
riziculteurs Diolas  ainsi  que  leurs voisins  de  Guinee-Bissau et  de  Guinee  (Conakry) se 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DIOLA WET RICE CULTIVATION 

595 
distinguent par une forme de gouvernement acephale et des structures sociales egalitaires. Bien 
que tres divers, ces groupes de langue Mande, cultivant presque tous le  riz de colline et 
pratiquant la  jachere, sont  organises en  lignages fondes sur l'ancetre et  hierarchises; ils 
conservent egalement une forme d'autorite "centralisee" representee par le chef du village, du 
lignage ou de la famille, ce premier etant considere comme le "proprietaire de la terre". Les 
effectifs des families paysannes sont generalement augmentes grace au recrutement d'autres 
membres qui se trouvent en situation de dependance vis-a-vis du chef de la maisonnee et 
forment une main d'oeuvre "captive". II s'y ajoute l'appoint constitue par une autre main 
d'oeuvre disponible  par l'entremise de  groupements de  travailleurs agricoles reunis  en 
compagnies. 
Par ailleurs chez les groupes Diolas "patens", chaque individus est "proprietaire" des terres 
et dispose de facto de l'usufruit et peut donner ou mettre en gage des champs de riz cultives en 
permanence. Bien  que  les  taches agricoles soient  la  prerogative des  couples  ou  familles 
domestiques, on fait aussi appel a des groupes d'entraide plus larges, en fonction des besoins et 
par le  jeu multiple des liens cognatiques, d'affinite ou d'amitie. 
Les distinctions entre les groupes egalitaires pratiquant une riziculture inondee "intensive", 
permanente (c'est-a-dire les Diolas, les Balantes et les Bagas), et les riziculteurs de langue 
Mande, plus "hierarchises" et pratiquant une culture "extensive" sur les hauteurs, resident 
davantage dans l'organisation culturelle qui regit l'ensemble des rapports sociaux et des modes 
de production que dans certains facteurs technologiques, demographiques, ou economiques. 

This content downloaded from 195.78.109.54 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 18:48:08 PM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

