Monteiro et al. International Journal of Mental Health Systems 2014, 8:9
http://www.ijmhs.com/content/8/1/9

R ES EAR CH
Open Access
Policy perspectives and attitudes towards mental
health treatment in rural Senegal
Nicole M Monteiro1*, Youssoupha Ndiaye2, Demetri Blanas3 and Idrissa Ba4

Abstract

Background: Mental health is often given low priority in health policy planning, particularly in developing
countries. Several international health bodies, including the World Health Organization, recommend integrating
mental health into primary care settings to reduce mortality and morbidity associated with mental illness,
particularly in low-resource settings.
Objective: This study explores health care workers' and policy stakeholders’ knowledge and attitudes regarding
mental illness, interactions with patients in the community, and perceived training needs at a health clinic in rural
southeastern Senegal. Interviews were conducted with eight key informant medical staff members and community
health workers.
Methods: Interview data were analyzed and interpreted using a qualitative content analysis based on the
grounded theory approach.
Results: The findings indicate that staff members encounter many patients with emotional/psychological problems
or mental illnesses, and they employ various strategies in treating these patients. Respondents also highlighted the
need for more training to address and diagnose mental health problems, especially severe psychiatric illnesses.
Conclusions: Findings are used to discuss recommendations for developing a comprehensive mental health
primary care treatment approach that includes screening patients for mental health problems screening, incorporating
rural villagers' attitudes and beliefs about mental illness into treatment, and utilizing community health workers—who
are often a first health contact for many—to work with the medical staff to identify mental health problems.
Keywords: Sub-Saharan Africa, Senegal, Mental health, Primary care system, Traditional healing

Background
Numerous studies and policy reports have underscored
the importance of integrating mental health into primary
health care in resource-poor settings. A recent Lancet
series highlights gaps in mental health services world-
wide and introduces a call to action to implement mental
health care initiatives in low- and middle-income countries
(LMIC) [1-3]. In 2008, the Movement for Global Mental
Health, an international coalition aimed at improving treat-
ment for people with mental disorders worldwide, was
launched as part of The Lancet’s initial call to action [4].
That same year, the World Health Organization (WHO)
released a report, titled “Integrating Mental Health into

* Correspondence: drnmonteiro@gmail.com
1Department of Psychology, University of Botswana, Private Bag, Gaborone
00775, Botswana
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

Primary Care: A Global Perspective,” that outlined a strat-
egy to improve and prioritize mental health care. The re-
port focused on the primary areas of training, awareness
and sensitization, and service delivery. It recommended in-
tegrating mental health into primary care settings to facili-
tate early, comprehensive, and local treatment for mental
disorders [5]. Key strategies to improve mental health care
in countries include the following: providing treatment for
psychiatric disorders in primary health care settings;
increasing patient access to psychotropic medication;
educating the public and raising awareness; including
families and communities in treatment; establishing na-
tional policies and legislation; developing human re-
sources; building relationships with multiple sectors
and stakeholders; monitoring community mental health;
and supporting research [5,6].

© 2014 Monteiro et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Monteiro et al. International Journal of Mental Health Systems 2014, 8:9
http://www.ijmhs.com/content/8/1/9

Page 2 of 9

Framing the problem
The global burden of mental illness has been documented
in statistics on overwhelmed health systems, unemploy-
ment, limited productivity, and deaths due to mental
disorders [6,7]. There are also countless published narra-
tives that detail how stigma and untreated mental illness
destroy lives. Every year, approximately 30% of the world’s
population develops a mental disorder, and up to two-
thirds of those individuals do not receive treatment [6].
Furthermore, the WHO has estimated that mental health
problems account for 12% of the Disability-Adjusted Life
Years (DALYs) lost [8].

The capacity of health systems to address these prob-
lems is restricted in resource-poor settings. Overall,
three-fourths of the burden of mental illness (including
depression, anxiety, schizophrenia, substance abuse, and
dementia) occurs in LMICs [9]. In the context of generally
sparse health infrastructure and health systems that focus
on communicable and infectious diseases, such as malaria,
tuberculosis, and HIV, mental health is often one of the
lowest priorities in LMICs. A major obstacle to improving
care in LMICs is the lack of practical mental health pol-
icies. Such policies are needed to direct comprehensive,
coordinated mental health care efforts and facilitate ser-
vice implementation in local communities [6]. According to
recent WHO data, while mental health is mentioned in the
general health policy of most African countries (80%),
almost half (44%) lack an approved or updated mental
health policy [10].

In Senegal, mental

illness contributed an estimated
seven percent of the country’s disease burden in 2008
[11]. The Senegalese Ministry of Health formulated an
official mental health policy that includes promotion,
prevention, and advocacy, and the country’s most recent
mental health plan was approved in 2006 [12]. Despite
these efforts, gaps in implementation persist. Most Sene-
galese primary care providers have not received formal
training on mental health. Official manuals on mental
disorders are not available in most clinics, and there is
no centralized system to document patient mental health
data [10].

Inadequate resources can be one of the primary con-
tributors to funding disparities throughout Africa and
other LMIC regions, but lack of finances is not the only
cause of poor mental health care. Health care spending
in Senegal totals six percent of the gross domestic prod-
uct [13]. While specific figures are not available, mental
health expenditures are presumed to be low. Another
challenge to increasing mental health services is limited
personnel [14] — e.g., it is estimated that there are only
0.33 psychiatrists and 0.03 psychologists per 100,000
people in Senegal [10]. Other barriers include the fact
that specific guidelines for integrating mental health
services into primary care settings are often absent, and

data on the negative economic impact of mental illness
have not been effective in convincing policymakers of
the urgency of this issue [15]. Finally, social stigma,
which creates negative attitudes about mental illness,
and a lack of knowledge often keep those who suffer
from seeking treatment [15-17].

Mental health in Senegal
Senegal is a former French colony in West Africa that
gained independence in 1960. It presently has an esti-
mated population of 13 million [18]. The current health
system was initially modeled after the French structure.
In 1956, the country’s first psychiatric unit was formally
established at Fann Hospital in the capital, Dakar.

The results of a post-independence health system
assessment revealed that psychiatric services were cen-
tralized in Dakar and based on an inpatient asylum
model, which aggravated the problems of access to care
and inadequate treatment. In 1975, psychiatric villages
were established throughout the country in an effort to
expand mental health care and facilitate a community
model of care [12]. The goal was to establish a psychiatric
village in every region in order to deinstitutionalize mental
health care, provide psycho-education, and involve
families in the treatment process. Currently, only two
still exist: one in Ziguinchor (in the southwestern re-
gion of the country), which has been transformed into
a psychiatric clinic, and one in Tambacounda (in the
southeastern region of the country), which is managed
by the village community of Botou, about 10 km outside
of Tambacounda city. In addition to the psychiatric
villages, there are also currently six psychiatric facilities:
 A psychiatric unit at L’Hôpital Principal in Dakar,
 A psychiatric unit at Hôpital de Saint-Louis, a
regional hospital 300 kilometers from the capital
 Centre de Sante Mentale” Dalal-Xel,” a private

which serves primarily military personnel

psychiatric hospital in Thies, 90 kilometers from the
capital
 Thiaroye Psychiatric Hospital, a private psychiatric
hospital in Fatick, 150 kilometers from the capital
 Centre Psychiatrique Emile Badiane, a psychiatric
center in Ziguinchor, 450 kilometers from the capital
 A small psychiatric unit in the town of

Tambacounda, 400 kilometers from Dakar.

Traditional healing practices are common in Senegal
and include spiritual and religious ceremonies, divina-
tions, and herbal medicines to treat patients suffering
from mental illness and their families [19]. The Ministry of
Health does not formally license traditional practitioners;
however, there are some mechanisms for collaboration be-
tween traditional practitioners and the formal health care

Monteiro et al. International Journal of Mental Health Systems 2014, 8:9
http://www.ijmhs.com/content/8/1/9

Page 3 of 9

structure. For example, there is a traditional medicine
bureau at the Ministry of Health, where traditional
practitioners are invited to participate in meetings with
officials.

Other than WHO disease burden reports, mental health
research in Senegal is scant. The limited findings, however,
indicate that symptoms of mental illness as well as gaps in
health workers’ knowledge and mental health training are
significant concerns within the Senegalese health care sys-
tem. Diop and colleagues found discrepancies between the
(higher) rate of psychiatric symptoms based on patients’
self- report and the (lower) rate of patient diagnosis based
on health worker screenings at a rural primary health cen-
ter [20]. This result is consistent with a multi-country
study (which included Senegal) that found lack of training
among health workers was associated with limited ability
to properly recognize psychiatric cases [21].

Findings from two other studies suggest that both
Western diagnostic categories and local traditional con-
cepts are sensitive to mental disorders among the popula-
tion in Senegal. In one study, schizophrenia and hysteria
were the top two clinical diagnoses, and interpersonal
conflict and daily stresses were the top precipitants of
hospitalization in a group of 1,025 adult psychiatric pa-
tients [22]. In another study, respondents among the
Serer ethnic group were able to discriminate between
mentally ill and non-mentally ill
individuals in their
community using local concepts and idioms of distress,
indicating that symptoms of mental illness are salient
within local communities in Senegal [23].

Field examples in Africa
Several field studies have examined the challenges and
benefits of integrating mental health services into pri-
mary care in Africa. These studies provide a background
and helpful
insights to understand the context of the
current study.

A situational analysis of treatment demand, access, and
attitudes toward mental illness at health centers throughout
Equatorial Guinea highlights both challenges and strengths
of addressing mental health needs. Challenges include a
lack of strategic mental health planning and limited pro-
gramming for the severely mentally ill. Strengths include
the country’s well-established primary care system and the
government’s commitment to upgrade mental health ser-
vices [24]. In a similar analysis of mental health integration
that compared a middle-income country (South Africa)
and two low-income countries (Uganda and Ghana), re-
searchers found major challenges to mental health integra-
tion,
implementation of mental
health policy, too few mental health specialists, and insuffi-
cient access to psychiatric medication for severe cases [25].
Addressing health worker attitudes and improving
training have also been identified as integral steps to

including inconsistent

improving mental health care and integrating mental
health treatment into primary care. Kapungwe and col-
leagues [26] found widespread stigma and discriminatory
attitudes among primary health workers in Zambia. The
authors called for training, awareness programs, and
funding to combat stigma and improve understanding of
the explanatory models of both patients and health care
workers during the training process [26]. In Kenya, a
health worker training program that integrated mental
health training into existing primary care instruction led
to positive outcomes. Specifically,
it increased health
worker knowledge,
improved therapeutic communica-
tion with patients and their families, and created new
liaisons with the community, including local chiefs [27].

Rationale for current study
Although policy recommendations on integrating mental
health into primary care settings have been published by
the WHO, to the best of the authors’ knowledge, they
have not been tailored to Senegal’s specific context. In
an effort to address the information gap about mental
health in primary care settings in Senegal, the current
study was undertaken to explore health care workers’
understanding of mental illness, attitudes about integra-
tion into primary care, and current activities related to
mental health awareness and treatment. The goals were to
examine workers’ attitudes and knowledge; identify mental
health needs from health care workers’ perspectives; and
inform future research, interventions, and policy planning.

Methods
General design
This study utilized qualitative key informant interviews.

Context
Six of eight interviews were conducted in the southeast-
ern region of Kedougou, in the Saraya health district.
Two additional health care worker stakeholder inter-
views were conducted with psychiatrists in Dakar.

Saraya is an isolated, resource-poor area that was estab-
lished as a new health district by the Senegalese Ministry
of Health in 2006. The health staff in Saraya consists of 15
permanent staff members, including a permanent doctor,
midwives, nurses, and part-time community health workers
(CHW). The district health facilities consist of one health
center and six outlying health posts. The population in this
district is estimated at over 34,000, with a density of ap-
proximately seven persons per square kilometer. Although
the majority of the inhabitants are farmers who grow cot-
ton, millet, corn, and peanuts, some also pan for gold in
small transient villages (Diouras). The main language is
Malinké, but Pulaar and Wolof are also spoken. However,
French is the primary language used at the health center
and surrounding health posts.

Monteiro et al. International Journal of Mental Health Systems 2014, 8:9
http://www.ijmhs.com/content/8/1/9

Page 4 of 9

This research was conducted as part of a series of
community health activities coordinated by the district
management team that works on health initiatives such
as vaccination campaigns, rapid malaria testing and re-
search, and CHW training.

Procedures and participants
Ethical approval was obtained through the clinic main
coordinator, who is also the district health officer. The
study was reviewed and approved by the Health Ministry
Committee in Senegal. Verbal
informed consent was
obtained from all participants. Purposive sampling was
used to select respondents with varying levels of experi-
ence working in rural primary care settings or familiarity
with mental health care in the country. Six key infor-
mants from the Saraya health district and two mental
health workers/policy stakeholders in Dakar were also
recruited. In line with previous research and guidelines
on sample size for key informant interviews, we aimed
to recruit 8–10 key informants [28,29]. Data saturation,
i.e., when no new themes or issues emerged, was
achieved after eight participants. Data collection ended
at that point. Health workers and stakeholders were
recruited in-person by local research assistants and
members of the research team. Researchers explained
the purpose of the study to the staff at the district health
center in Saraya and various stakeholders in Dakar. They
then followed up individually with potential respondents
to find out if they were interested in participating.

The interviews lasted 45–60 minutes and took place at
the health center in Saraya or in participants’ office in
Dakar. They were conducted in French and audio re-
corded, and written notes were taken during the interview.
Interview questions focused on knowledge and percep-
tions of mental illness and the degree to which the partici-
pants encountered psychological or psychiatric problems
with their patients. Questions were structured so that
respondents could also add additional information.

Interviews were comprised of semi-structured explora-
tory questions that examined health workers’ (physicians,
nurses, midwives, community health workers) and policy-
makers’ awareness and perceptions of mental illness in
general and in their specific communities. Questions
addressed mental health problems the participants en-
counter in a clinical setting and their perceptions of how
mental illness is identified and treated in the community.
The interview questionnaire’s reliability and validity were
addressed through consultation among members of the
research team in order to establish agreement on the
interpretive codes derived from the interviews and
determine the suitability of the interview questions. To
establish content validity, the interview questions were
reviewed in English and French by three of the researchers
to assess the breadth of coverage and social and cultural

relevance of the questions. Questions were then revised
based on the local researchers’ and research assistants’
feedback about social and cultural relevance. Face validity
was confirmed by examining the presence of inappropriate
responses, which indicate that the questions did not
make sense or were not understood. There were very
few inappropriate responses.

Data analysis
Interviews were transcribed, translated into English, and
subjected to systematic content analysis to identify re-
sponse themes. One research team member analyzed the
audio and written transcripts using the ATLAS.ti program
to organize response categories, which were then reviewed
with the other team members. The analysis was driven by
an inductive content analysis approach [30], based on
grounded theory (i.e., Glaser & Strauss [31]), which allows
researchers to inductively develop interpretive codes and
further refine the codes to fit the data and reflect re-
spondents’ experiences [30]. The current study’s ana-
lysis sought to identify themes, or recurrent concepts,
in order to explain broader contextual links [30].

Results
The participants included two nurses, two midwives,
and one community health worker in Saraya; one health
post chief nurse from a nearby village; and two psychia-
trists working in Dakar. Five participants completed three
years of post-secondary training. One attended school up
to the eighth grade, and both psychiatrists had medical de-
grees. Three of the participants (besides the psychiatrists)
reported formal instruction on mental illness as part of
their training. All of the participants except one were from
regions of the country outside of Saraya.

Data coding revealed the following general themes in
the interview responses: health workers’ definitions of
mental illness (symptoms and causes), community beliefs
and practices regarding mental
illness, understanding
community attitudes toward mental illness, patient prob-
lems encountered by health workers, health worker treat-
ment practices, barriers to treatment because of mental
illness stigma, mental health training needs of staff, local-
izing treatment, and government policies and efforts. Key
terms that emerged from the analysis include anxiety,
depression, schizophrenia, stigma, witchcraft, traditional
healers, family and marriage problems, substance abuse,
limited availability of psychotropic medications, African
culture, resistance to medical treatment, coping with pov-
erty, polygamy, counseling women, midwives’ multiple
roles, mental health neglected, limited education, lack of
training, health staff isolated, roles, formal and informal
counseling strategies, urban and rural differences, and
migration.

Monteiro et al. International Journal of Mental Health Systems 2014, 8:9
http://www.ijmhs.com/content/8/1/9

Page 5 of 9

Health workers’ definitions of mental illness: symptoms
and causes
 Health workers provided a range of explanations

about the causes and presentation of mental illness.
They described mental illness as any serious
psychiatric diagnosis, such as schizophrenia, but also
as any condition where someone does not fit the social
norms of his or her society, including self-isolation
from family. One participant noted, “Mentally ill people
live in the street and do things like eat trash”. Another
said, “Cutting yourself off from family is a type of
mental illness. It is very serious”. Anxiety was
described as “a person being agitated and withdrawn,”
while participants differentiated psychosis as a more
severe illness, defined by inappropriate behavior and
inability to care for oneself. For example, one health
worker said, “Crazy people hit you and don’t like to
wear clothes. Some days they can dress themselves,
but usually they cannot”. They reported that mental
health problems can be identified by patients’ physical
movements, thought processes, and demeanor. One
of the participants observed that “someone always
appearing happy, walking around and laughing all day
long, is not normal”.
 Respondents highlighted poverty, lack of economic
development, limited education, drugs, and family
problems as causes of sadness and anxiety in the
village. One participant pointed out how a lack of
appreciation for education among families can lead
to mental health issues:

There are many causes, but if you don’t have a high
level of education, you don’t have a broad perspective
on life. Many families don’t value education or
support their children going to school. This may lead
you to steal, do drugs - marijuana. That’s why people
make [drug] concoctions in the village.

Another health worker stated, “Ninety-five percent
of mental illness is caused by drugs”.

 Sorcery was also identified as a cause of severe

mental illness. One participant responded, “Here in
Africa, there is also witchcraft or mystique. That is
when someone comes across a bad spirit or someone
puts a spell on them”. Participants also noted
differences between the stressors faced by rural and
urban residents that can lead to mental illness. While
urban residents struggle to cope with joblessness and
under-employment, extreme poverty and social
isolation can be sources of distress for villagers.
According to one health worker, “some residents don’t
have very good rooting in the village - not more than
one or two generations, so they feel alone”.

Community beliefs and practices regarding mental illness
 Health workers reported that individuals in the
community have unique cultural and spiritual
explanations for mental illness. People in the
community often say that “people go crazy because
of sickness”, such as a persistent headache, or “after
going into the bush and seeing the devil”.
Participants reported a common belief among many
people (including health workers) that some
students “go crazy from school – when they study
alone or have to struggle with difficult subjects like
math and science”.
 Respondents reported that, in general, community

members only recognize severe cases as mental
illness. Prior to symptoms becoming severe, people
primarily go to marabouts (Muslim clerics who use
Islamic religious traditions in their healing practices)
and traditional healers (exorcists, herbalists) for
treatment of a range of psychosocial and psychiatric
symptoms. They typically only see a medical doctor
after the symptoms become worse. By the time
many severely ill patients are brought to the clinic,
“they have been ill for at least 1 year and have been
treated by a traditional healer”, noted one respondent.
Another participant reported, “Some patients are
brought by their families when they are very agitated
and are then given benzodiazepine to calm down”.
Another stated, “Mentally unstable people don’t come
here – they only come here if they’re sick. The
psychotic patients never come here”.

Understanding community attitude to mental illness
 According to the psychiatrists interviewed, two

important factors must be considered in
understanding the community’s attitude about
psychiatric treatment for mental illness. One is the
feeling among many people that the discipline of
psychiatry “was forced upon Africa by Europeans
and that many people want to re-affirm their cultural
roots by addressing psychological and social problems
using traditional means”. Secondly, the community’s
unique cultural interpretation of symptoms leans
toward “externalized explanations of symptoms and
illness, such as witchcraft and evil spirits”.

Patient problems encountered by health workers
 Health workers reported that they often encounter

repatriated immigrants who return from abroad
with social, psychological, and financial problems.
Respondents also acknowledged that psychological
issues underlie a number of patient physical

Monteiro et al. International Journal of Mental Health Systems 2014, 8:9
http://www.ijmhs.com/content/8/1/9

Page 6 of 9

symptoms they treat, especially vague complaints
and gastrointestinal problems. Other patient
problems that health workers reported include
unwanted pregnancies and social and emotional
problems experienced by women who have reached
menopause. Noting that there is a mental health
aspect associated with most of the patient complaints,
one health worker said, “Many people have
psychological and mental health problems that need
to be dealt with before they turn to something worse”.
 Midwives reported dealing with psychological and

emotional distress “due to women’s situations”
among female patients. They are often privy to
female patients’ fears and problems, including
relationship conflict, polygamous marriages, and
sexually transmitted infections (STIs). According to
one midwife, “the majority of families in the village
practice polygamy. It is common for two wives [who
are in a polygamous marriage] to have problems
with each other or the husband”. Another midwife
added, “Sometimes when a woman comes in with an
STI, health workers have difficulty following the
standard medical practice of treating all of the partners
[i.e., husband and all the wives] because the woman is
afraid to admit to her husband that she has an STI”.
The midwives reported engaging in a lot of informal
counseling with women facing these situations.

Stigma and barriers to treatment
 Respondents noted that stigma about mental illness
—from medical doctors as well as the general public
—is widespread in the community. Additional
barriers that were noted include limited availability
of neuropsychiatric medications, an insufficient
number of mental health specialists, and social
changes in the society. One participant observed
that, “there are more mentally ill people wandering
the streets in the urban cities because of changes in
the family structure. We need to prevent these
problems in the village”. Citing the fact that not all
regions of the country have hospitals with
psychiatric units, another health worker said,
“Mental illness is neglected here in the village”.

Mental health training needs of staff
 The health workers stated that, despite their

familiarity with the community and the types of
problems patients experience, they desire more
training on recognizing and addressing mental
illness, especially severe psychiatric diagnoses. They
also expressed the need for general professional
support. According to one respondent, “sometimes

we can feel a bit isolated and overwhelmed here at
the health center. We are not from here and we
have to see many patients”.

Localizing treatment
 The N’dep ritual was described as an example of an
approach to localizing mental health treatment and
making it more culturally relevant. The psychiatrists
interviewed described N’dep as a traditional Wolof
ritual that has been adapted as a communal
treatment in some parts of Senegal. In some
psychiatric hospitals, N’dep has been used as a form
of therapy where the group is headed by a patient
and held in a traditional group circle called a penc,
named after a tree that symbolizes community
support. The custom calls for community members
to sit together to discuss important issues. One
participant stated that “an approach that includes
the community helping care for patients is best for
the Senegalese people”. Respondents noted that a
focus on local knowledge is important because even
for Senegalese doctors within the country, it is not
always possible to understand the dynamics of each
region and locality.

Government policies and efforts
 Respondents reported that current efforts to

improve mental health care include creating an
instructional manual for health workers, planning a
school to train nurses to treat mental illness, and
collecting statistics on the prevalence of various
disorders. However, funding is a problem, and the
fact that patients do not tend to use existing health
structures makes collecting diagnostic data difficult.
There have also been plans to coordinate mobile
visits to patients’ homes in rural areas, but funding
and planning have been significant obstacles.
According to one respondent, “there is a national
mental health plan, but the activities are not
planned in a coordinated way”.

Discussion
These data provide insight into the intersection of pol-
icy, health worker perspectives, and community attitudes
on mental health treatment in rural Senegal. The inter-
view responses reflect some of the recent discourse in
global mental health survey research and case studies of
mental health integration efforts in Africa. An important
finding is that participants presented a psycho-social-
cultural understanding of mental illness in rural Senegal
that can be used to further refine efforts to integrate
mental illness treatment into primary care settings.

Monteiro et al. International Journal of Mental Health Systems 2014, 8:9
http://www.ijmhs.com/content/8/1/9

Page 7 of 9

The respondents in this study brought up challenges
that have been discussed in previous research, such as in-
consistent and uncoordinated policies, and insufficient
training and resources to treat severe cases [25]. Similar to
conclusions drawn from research in Equatorial Guinea,
the findings here point to the potential strength of a well-
established primary care system [24], albeit one that is
overly centralized in Senegal. For example, the model in
Senegal of having district health facilities that are associ-
ated with smaller health posts could provide a strong net-
work for localizing formal health worker training and
community awareness activities.

These findings are also consistent with previous work
on the impact of stigma (from both community members
and health workers) as a barrier to service utilization and
integration of mental health treatment [26]. A strategy
recommended by researchers to overcome this stigma is
to implement targeted awareness and sensitization cam-
paigns [26,32]. Another important barrier to treatment is
limited funding. Given health worker reports of limited re-
sources, it is important to consider that additional reasons
that patients in Saraya and surrounding villages do not
seek help include the cost associated with care and patients’
awareness that the facility may not be fully equipped
to treat them (which is a function of national funding
problems).

Understanding and integrating the cultural context
into care is critical for buy-in and commitment, and
holds promise as a pathway to better integration of mental
health care. Respondents’ observation that the population
may reject psychiatric treatment as “un-African” is signifi-
cant for developing strategies that are congruent with local
contexts and beliefs [32,33]. This may call for more fo-
cused efforts to recognize parallel health systems and con-
sult with traditional healers about common patient
problems and access to patients. Admittedly, such collab-
oration would be a difficult task. While communities may
prefer traditional healers and treatments, poverty and
rapid social changes make it problematic for traditional
systems to carry the weight of tending to the mentally
ill. Contemporary health infrastructure and training are
clearly necessary to address patient needs. A compre-
hensive approach, that takes into account the role of
traditional healers [24] while also prioritizing spending
and training, should be part of future planning. For ex-
ample, the use of the N’dep group, cited by respondents
as a way to integrate culture into existing treatment
approaches, provides a useful model of localization.

One key conclusion that can be drawn is that health
care workers in rural Senegal can be trained to do for-
mal and informal mental health screening due, in part,
to their strong knowledge of the local cultural context.
Previous research demonstrates that even minimal train-
ing for counselors in their own communities can be

effective in addressing and treating anxiety and depres-
sion in low-resource settings [34]. In Kenya, even limited
training for primary health care workers resulted in
measurable improvements in health worker knowledge
of mental illness and therapeutic relationships with pa-
tients and the community [27]. In the context of the
current study, training would also be important in pro-
viding health workers with accurate information on the
symptoms and causes of psychiatric illness.

As the respondents highlighted, there is clear evidence
that mental health care is neglected, particularly in re-
mote regions of the country. Integrating mental health
care into primary care settings throughout the country is
an important strategy to address the disparities and neg-
lect. Some of the primary goals of integration include
capacity-building, training non-specialists, raising aware-
ness, and sensitizing the community. A number of inves-
tigators [32,33] have recommended that countries align
policies with their social and cultural realities [32] to re-
duce stigma and raise awareness. These goals are often
recommended where mental health policy is non-existent
or scant [24], such as in Senegal. The current findings sup-
port such policy recommendations and goals.

However, previous studies have identified a number of
challenges to achieving these aims, including lack of spe-
cialists, limited access to medication, and poor implementa-
tion policies [25]. The participants in this study recognized
similar challenges in their setting and acknowledged their
need for more knowledge and training about mental illness.
Furthermore, making mental health one of the national
health priorities is also necessary to improve mental health
care in the country. Research on mental health care in
LMICs confirms that policy needs to be clearly articulated
and consistently applied, and that spending should be prior-
itized and focused [5,6,13].

The participants in this study pointed out the relation-
ship of poor mental health to larger social factors, in-
cluding poverty, migration, and education. The role of
these global development factors calls for the involve-
ment of multiple sectors in improving mental health
care. Therefore, NGO’s, government and international
aid agencies, and the private sector can play a role in
crafting mental health policy and strategies.

Implications
The science and practice of integrating mental health
into the primary care setting in this resource-poor coun-
try need to be given priority in order to lower the dis-
ease burden of mental
illness. Capacity building may
include engaging various stakeholders and partners—
Ministry of Health, the medical faculty at the country’s
largest university (Cheikh Anta Diop University)—and
expert researchers and practitioners in the country.
Training community health workers and mid-level medical

Monteiro et al. International Journal of Mental Health Systems 2014, 8:9
http://www.ijmhs.com/content/8/1/9

Page 8 of 9

personnel, such as nurses and midwives, particularly in
rural areas, is a feasible way to better meet the mental
health needs of the community.

A practical approach toward developing a comprehen-
sive primary care treatment plan could include basic pa-
tient mental health screening by the health staff and
CHWs. Although patients may go directly to health cen-
ters or hospitals when the problem is severe enough, the
CHWs are often the first point of contact with the health
system. Plans for prevention and treatment need to ad-
dress stigma, cultural beliefs, patients’ use of parallel
health systems, and availability of medication. Addition-
ally, plans should be developed to conduct small-scale
awareness/sensitization programs that are specifically
tailored to rural communities.

Given that patients primarily go to marabouts and trad-
itional healers for treatment either before or while seeing
a medical doctor, it would be worthwhile for policymakers
and researchers to explore how to further integrate trad-
itional healing practitioners into formal mental health
care. Finding ways to capitalize on the population’s strong
cultural values and their confidence in traditional healers
could be a possible avenue to expand mental health care
where there are currently gaps, particularly in rural re-
gions. Initial efforts should focus on assessing and docu-
menting the current scope of traditional practitioners’
treatment. Further efforts should explore the feasibility
and challenges of
formal collaborations between trad-
itional and medical practitioners, with an emphasis on
traditional healers’ roles in assessing and alleviating psy-
chosocial distress among patients.

The need for training and support should not be over-
looked. Health workers seem to be carrying out multiple
roles that might be overwhelming in isolated settings.
Their experience of dealing with mental health issues
while also being aware that they are not fully equipped
to address those issues can lead them to experience
work burnout. Health worker wellbeing is critical to the
successful
implementation of mental health programs
and should also be prioritized within the health care
system.

Additionally, these findings point to several possible

cultural perceptions and conceptualizations

areas for future research, including the following:
 Community definitions of mental illness, including
 Community uses of traditional healers in treatment
 Prevalence of mental disorders, such as depression,
 Specific gender issues—differences in assessment,
treatment, and outcomes for women vs. men
 Awareness related to women’s issues, such as

of mental disorders

anxiety, psychosis, and trauma

menopause and other reproductive health concerns

 Child and adolescents mental health
 Systemic challenges and opportunities for

integrating mental health and primary care and
increasing effectiveness of psychosocial approaches.

This study’s findings help to establish a platform for
more extensive qualitative and quantitative research that
addresses the gaps in treatment. The small sample size
suggests that additional studies are needed to examine
other important topics and generalize these initial findings.

Conclusions
This small exploratory study is significant in that it de-
scribes several aspects of
the contemporary mental
health landscape in a region where there has been lim-
ited mental health research. An important finding is that
health workers presented a psycho-social-cultural under-
standing of mental illness in rural Senegal that can be
used to further refine efforts to integrate mental illness
into primary care settings. Health workers’ strong know-
ledge of the local cultural context is a strength that can
be used for further program and policy planning. Rec-
ommendations for developing a comprehensive mental
health primary care treatment approach include patient
mental health screening, incorporating rural villagers' at-
titudes and beliefs about mental
illness, and utilizing
community health workers—who are often a first health
contact for many in the community—to work with the
medical staff to identify mental health problems.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
NM conceived the study, analyzed and interpreted the data, and wrote the
manuscript. NM, DB, and YN developed the research design and interview
protocol. NM and DB conducted the interviews. DB, YN, and IB made
substantive contributions to data interpretation and were integrally involved
in revising the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.

Authors’ information
NM, PhD; YN, MD; DB, MD, MPH; IB, MD.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the Kendeya Community Health Partnership
and the community and health workers in Saraya, Senegal.

Author details
1Department of Psychology, University of Botswana, Private Bag, Gaborone
00775, Botswana. 2Ministry of Health and Social Action, Dakar, Senegal.
3Institute For Family Health/Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New
York, USA. 4Faculté de Médecine, Pharmacie et Odontostomatologie,
Université Cheikh Anta Diop de Dakar, Dakar, Senegal.

Received: 27 November 2013 Accepted: 16 March 2014
Published: 19 March 2014

References
1.

Chisholm D, Flisher AJ, Lund C, Patel V, Saxena S, Thornicroft G, Tomlinson M:
Scale up services for mental disorders: a call for action. Lancet 2007,
370(9594):1241–1252.

Monteiro et al. International Journal of Mental Health Systems 2014, 8:9
http://www.ijmhs.com/content/8/1/9

Page 9 of 9

28. Guest G, Bunce A, Johnson L: How many interviews are enough? An
experiment with data saturation and variability. Field Methods 2006,
18(1):59–82.

29. Nastasi B: Study notes: qualitative research: sampling & sample size

considerations. https://my.laureate.net/Faculty/docs/Faculty%20Documents/
qualit_res__smpl_size_consid.doc.

30. Bradley EH, Curry LA, Devers KJ: Qualitative data analysis for health

services research: developing taxonomy, themes, and theory. Health Serv
Res 2007, 42(4):1758–1772.

31. Glaser BG, Strauss AL: The Discovery of Grounded Research: Strategies for

Qualitative Research. New York: Aldine De Gruyter; 1967.

32. Gureje O, Alem A: Mental health policy development in Africa. Bull World

Health Organ 2000, 78(4):475–482.

33. Alem A, Jacobsson L, Hanlon C: Community‐based mental health care in

Africa: mental health workers’ views. World Psychiatry 2008, 7(1):54–57.

34. Ali BS, Rahbar MH, Naeem S, Gul A, Mubein S, Iqbal A: The effectiveness of
counseling on anxiety and depression by minimally trained counselors:
a randomized controlled trial. Am J Psychother 2003, 57(3):324–336.

doi:10.1186/1752-4458-8-9
Cite this article as: Monteiro et al.: Policy perspectives and attitudes
towards mental health treatment in rural Senegal. International Journal of
Mental Health Systems 2014 8:9.

2.

3.

Patel V, Boyce N, Collins PY, Saxena S, Horton R: A renewed agenda for
global mental health. Lancet 2011, 378(9801):1441–1442.
Lancet Global Mental Health Working Group: Executive summary. In The
Lancet 2007, Volume 370. http://www.thelancet.com/series/global-mental-
health.

4. Movement for global mental health. http://www.globalmentalhealth.org/

about.

5. World Organization of National Colleges, Academies, & Academic

Associations of General Practitioners-Family Physicians: Integrating Mental
Health into Primary Health Care: A Global Perspective. Geneva: World Health
Organization; 2008.
Jacob KS, Sharan P, Mirza I, Garrido-Cumbrera M, Seedat S, Mari JJ, Saxena S:
Mental health systems in countries: where are we now? Lancet 2007,
370(9592):1061–1077.
Desjarlais R, Eisenberg L, Good B, Kleinman A: World Mental Health: Problems
and Priorities in Low-Income Countries. New York: Oxford University Press; 1995.

6.

7.

8. World Health Organization, Mental Health Research and Evidence,

9.

Department of Mental Health and Substance Dependence: Prevention and
Promotion in Mental Health. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2002.
Patel V, Araya R, Chatterjee S, Chisholm D, Cohen A, De Silva M, Van
Ommeren M: Treatment and prevention of mental disorders in low-income
and middle-income countries. Lancet 2007, 370(9591):991–1005.

10. World Health Organization, Department of Mental Health & Substance

Abuse: Mental Health Atlas: 2011- Senegal. Geneva: World Health
Organization; 2011.

11. Mathers CD, Fat DM, Boerma JT: The Global Burden of Disease: 2004 Update.

Geneva: World Health Organization; 2008.

12. World Health Organization, Department of Mental Health & Substance

Abuse: Mental Health Atlas: 2005. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2005.
13. World Health Organization, Regional Office for Africa: Senegal - Factsheets of

Health Statistics. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2010.

14. Prince M, Patel V, Saxena S, Maj M, Maselko J, Phillips MR, Rahman A:
No health without mental health. Lancet 2007, 370(9590):859–877.
Saxena S, Thornicroft G, Knapp M, Whiteford H: Resources for mental
health: scarcity, inequity, and inefficiency. Lancet 2007, 370(9590):878–889.

15.

16. Gary FA: Stigma: barrier to mental health care among ethnic minorities.

Issues in Mental Health Nursing 2005, 26(10):979–999.
Sartorius N: Stigma and mental health. Lancet 2007, 370(9590):810–811.

17.
18. Central intelligence agency, the world fact book – Senega. https://www.

cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/bc.html.

19. Balde S, Clark S: Traditional healers in Casamance, Senegal. World Health

Forum 1994, 15:390–392.

20. Diop B, Collignon R, Guèye M, Harding TW: Diagnosis and symptoms of

21.

22.

mental disorder in a rural area of Senegal. Afr J Med Med Sci 1982, 11
(3):95–103.
Ignacio LL, De Arango MV, Baltazar J, Busnello ED, Climent CE, Elhakim A,
Wig NN: Knowledge and attitudes of primary health care personnel
concerning mental health problems in developing countries. Am J Public
Health 1983, 73(9):1081–1084.
Thiam MH, Gueye M: Clinical aspects of hysteria at the psychiatric clinic
of the Fann University Hospital Center. Apropos of a prospective study
of 121 cases. Dakar Med 1998, 43(1)):41–44.

23. Beiser M, Ravel JL, Collomb H, Egelhoff C: Assessing psychiatric disorder

among the Serer of Senegal. J Nerv Ment Dis 1972, 154(2):141–151.

24. Morón-Nozaleda MG, de Tojeiro JG, Cobos-Muñoz D, Fernández-Liria A:

Integrating mental health into primary care in Africa: the case of
equatorial guinea. Intervention 2011, 9(3):304–314.

25. Bhana A, Petersen I, Baillie KL, Flisher AJ: Implementing the world health

report 2001 recommendations for integrating mental health into
primary health care: a situation analysis of three African countries:
Ghana, South Africa and Uganda. International Review of Psychiatry 2010,
22(6):599–610.
Kapungwe A, Cooper S, Mayeya J, Mwanza J, Mwape L, Sikwese A, Lund C:
Attitudes of primary health care providers towards people with mental
illness: evidence from two districts in Zambia. African Journal of Psychiatry
2011, 14(4):290–297.
Jenkins R, Kiima D, Njenga F, Okonji M, Kingora J, Kathuku D, Lock S:
Integration of mental health into primary care in Kenya. World Psychiatry
2010, 9(2):118–120.

26.

27.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 

• Convenient online submission

• Thorough peer review

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges

• Immediate publication on acceptance

• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar

• Research which is freely available for redistribution

Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

