Medical Anthropology

ISSN: 0145-9740 (Print) 1545-5882 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/gmea20

Overlaps and Disconnects in Reproductive Health
Care: Global Policies, National Programs, and the
Micropolitics of Reproduction in Northern Senegal

Ellen E. Foley

To cite this article: Ellen E. Foley (2007) Overlaps and Disconnects in Reproductive Health Care:
Global Policies, National Programs, and the Micropolitics of Reproduction in Northern Senegal,
Medical Anthropology, 26:4, 323-354, DOI: 10.1080/01459740701619830
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/01459740701619830

Published online: 15 Oct 2007.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 578

View related articles 

Citing articles: 20 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=gmea20

Medical Anthropology, 26:323–354, 2007
Copyright # Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
ISSN: 0145-9740 print/1545-5882 online
DOI: 10.1080/01459740701619830

Overlaps and Disconnects in
Reproductive Health Care: Global
Policies, National Programs, and the
Micropolitics of Reproduction in
Northern Senegal

Ellen E. Foley

The International Conference on Population and Development (ICPD) held in
Cairo in 1994 called for a global commitment to increasing women’s agency
and reproductive options by promoting a reproductive health agenda. Volun-
tary contraceptive use and the quality of reproductive health care have
become the predominant emphases in family planning initiatives. Yet, many
programs worldwide demonstrate a continued commitment
to fertility
reduction and slowing population growth. This article explores three arenas
of contemporary discourse about reproductive health and family planning.
Using Senegal as a case study, it highlights the significant overlaps and dis-
connects among global reproductive health policy, national priorities and pro-
grams, and the biopolitics of gender, marriage, and fertility that shape
Senegalese women’s reproductive behavior. The article points to the slow
decline in national fertility rates to explore how family planning initiatives fail
to address reproduction in the context of women’s socio-economic challenges
and cultural and religious fertility ideals.

Key Words: cultural norms; family planning; gender; reproductive health; Senegal

ELLEN FOLEY is an Assistant Professor of International Development and Social Change at
Clark University. Her research examines health sector reform, reproductive health, gender,
and the micro-politics of household health. Correspondence may be directed to her at the
Department of International Development, Community, and Environment (IDCE), Clark
University, 950 Main St., Worcester, MA 01610. E-mail: efoley@clarku.edu

323

324 E. E. Foley

(ICPD),

Despite three decades of family planning programs, a global com-
mitment to universal access to contraception, and reported high
rates of unmet need for contraception, Senegalese women face over-
whelming constraints on their reproductive lives. This article
explores these contradictions and it offers an analysis of the pro-
found incongruity among the agenda for women’s reproductive
health as articulated at the 1994 International Conference on Popu-
lation and Development
the Senegalese government’s
reproductive health agenda, and the everyday dilemmas that Sene-
galese women face as they navigate the precarious terrain of mar-
riage and childbearing. In particular, I explore the past decade of
reproductive health programs in Senegal and the disjuncture
between the Cairo ‘‘empowerment agenda’’ for women and the
actual constraints many women face around reproductive choices.
As an exploration of the convergence of global and national popu-
lation policies, the Senegalese case provides one kind of ‘‘micro-his-
tory’’ of the sort Connelly (2003) calls for in his attempt
to
historicize the field of population control through attention to mul-
tileveled fields of inquiry and how population control policies play
out in different contexts. Through examination of a particular eth-
nographic setting, this article holds global policies, national pro-
grams, and women’s reproductive logic in a single frame to
bridge the divide between histories of population policy and ethno-
graphies of reproduction. Using this approach, I explore how popu-
lation policies and programs are deployed, mediated, and refuted
in daily practice.

The complexities of implementing the Cairo platform became
clear in the decade following the 1994 ICPD meeting (DeJong
2000). The new emphasis in reproductive health articulated at Cairo
was designed to help individuals achieve their reproductive inten-
tions. Although many governments have taken significant steps
toward reforming reproductive health policies and services, univer-
sal access to contraceptives and self-determination in reproduction
remains elusive. Decades of efforts to change reproductive beha-
vior, particularly in the high-fertility areas of West Africa, have also
fallen short of the mark. Meanwhile, Senegalese women struggle to
protect their health and provide for their children while meeting
sociocultural expectations to bear many children within a stable
marital union (Adjamagbo and Antoine 2002).

The Cairo objective to empower individuals to make informed
reproductive choices creates a dilemma in contexts such as Senegal

Overlaps and Disconnects in Reproductive Health Care

325

where desired family size remains high and government planners
and bilateral donors seek to reduce fertility. The commitment by
governments and donors to limit population and slow growth rates
runs counter to the Cairo declaration that men and women should
have full authority over their reproductive destinies. In the decade
following the ICPD meeting, the Senegalese government has taken
steps toward implementing the Cairo platform of action by creating
a new Division of Reproductive Health within the Ministry of
Health in 2002 and drafting new reproductive health legislation.
Reproductive health experts often consider Senegal’s program to
be one of the more progressive and innovative since the Ministry
of Health was quick to integrate family planning, to provide STD
and HIV=AIDS services, and to offer a minimal package of infer-
tility services. The Senegalese government has also prioritized
increasing access and demand for high-quality reproductive health
care by expanding services and organizing promotional and edu-
cation campaigns about contraceptives (Sall 1999).

Despite implementing several aspects of the Cairo agenda,
demographic targets and concerns about high fertility and low con-
traceptive use remain prominent in the Senegalese national health
agenda. Much to the disappointment of the United States Agency
for International Development
(USAID) and other population
donors, Senegal’s reproductive health programs have thus far failed
to change reproductive behavior. The two key strategies for increas-
ing contraceptive use, the extensive promotion of family planning
services and ‘‘quality of care’’ improvements to attract women to
family planning clinics, have produced few results. Demographic
targets for slowing population growth have not been met.

Looking at the Cairo agenda more broadly as one of empower-
ment and self-determination for women, the Cairo-inspired reforms
in Senegal have also failed to increase women’s agency or to
‘‘empower’’ them. This failure stems largely from the way in which
the Cairo platform overlooks socio-economic dimensions of gender
inequality, and therefore misreads the source of Senegalese
women’s reproductive constraints. The limitations on Senegalese
women’s reproductive choices have little to do with a lack of legal
protections for an individual woman’s body or bodily autonomy.
Rather, the restrictions stem from widely held cultural norms and
gendered economic relationships that together limit many women’s
primary socio-economic strategy to high parity within marital
unions. For many Senegalese women, the strategic deployment of

326 E. E. Foley

their bodily resources, including their sexual availability and repro-
ductive potential, are the basis of social and material security.
Regardless of extensive campaigns to promote the use of contracep-
tives, the national program has not expanded women’s life options
beyond the sociocultural formula for attaining reproductive suc-
cess. Increasing women’s access to contraceptives and high-quality
reproductive health services is an important objective, but without
the creation of new social norms or economic opportunities, these
efforts fail to bring about the kinds of social change that would
empower women and bring about fertility decline that is so desired
by the donors and the national government.

This article draws on ethnographic research conducted between
August 1998 and December 1999 in the Saint Louis medical district
in Northern Senegal, with follow-up research conducted in 2002
and 2005. It is part of a larger study that focused on the effects of
decentralization and privatization of the health sector on women’s
health in Senegal (Foley 2001; 2002). In the course of conducting
interviews and focus groups to elicit data about women’s health
practices after significant restructuring of the health care system, I
found that women primarily wanted to talk about reproductive
health. In response to open-ended questions about obtaining medi-
cal care in the newly privatized health system, our conversations
consistently arrived at the topic of reproduction and contraceptive
use. The interviews and focus group discussions were not designed
to elicit reproductive health histories or data about women’s repro-
ductive strategies. However, this was such a persistent theme in
women’s lives that I unintentionally ‘‘captured’’ many vivid stories
and concerns about contraception and fertility.

Given Senegal’s long history with family planning programs,
contraceptives and family planning have become widely known
by rural and urban women and men alike. Wolof expressions such
as damay planning (‘‘I’m doing family planning’’), naani doom (‘‘tak-
ing the pill’’), and soreental njuur (‘‘birth spacing’’) have become
part of the language of everyday life in Senegal. Despite this famili-
arity with family planning, what became evident throughout the
field research period is that women desire to have many children
and they experience considerable anxiety about using contracep-
tives. Their perspectives provided a sharp contrast to the images
then being circulated by the family planning media campaign.

My research included interviews with rural and urban women
in the Saint Louis zone. The interviews focused on family health

Overlaps and Disconnects in Reproductive Health Care

327

challenges in the wake of currency devaluation and health sector
reform. The stories of contraceptive use that emerged in these con-
versations complement the data from focus group discussions
about reproductive challenges. I conducted eight focus groups in
Pikine, the main urban field site. Pikine is a predominately Wolof
speaking, low-income urban shantytown in the northern city of
Saint Louis. Pikine is typical of the large conglomerations of unor-
ganized urban settlement commonly found at the social, economic,
and geographical peripheries of urban centers in sub-Saharan
Africa. Although Saint Louis proper is a tourist hub and one of
the larger urban centers in Senegal, Pikine residents live at the mar-
gins of town and typically lack access to urban amenities such as
running water, electricity, basic sanitation services, public schools,
and formal sector employment. Focus group participants were
members of registered women’s associations in Pikine. The parti-
cipants were all Muslim women employed in the informal sector
(largely as market traders); most of them had received no formal
education. With the exception of one focus group conducted with
women aged 18 to 30 years, group participants were between the
ages of 30 to 50 years. Most women were married at the time of
the research.

CAIROþ 10: A LASTING IMPACT?

The connections among population growth, development, and
environmental degradation have been the subjects of contention
over the latter half of the 20th century, with major UN population
conferences in 1974, 1984, and 1994 serving as important sites for
these debates. Many population programs debuted in the late
1950s and continued through the 1970s as northern governments
and development agencies were increasingly concerned with popu-
lation growth in the south. Feminists were outspoken in their cri-
tiques of
their emphasis on stopping
population growth at the expense of informed consent and respect-
ing individual needs (Hartmann 1995) . Cairo promised to be differ-
ent. The Cairo conference has been described as ushering in a ‘‘new
paradigm’’ in population policy that shifts attention from a ‘‘macro
preoccupation with the impact of rapid population growth on econ-
omic development to a concern for individual rights in sexuality
and reproduction’’ (DeJong 2000:942). This vision is known as the

these programs

for

328 E. E. Foley

human rights approach to reproductive health: family planning
programs should respond to the needs of individuals, rather than
attempt to slow population growth.

The Cairo platform emphasizes offering a full range of repro-
ductive health services and it stresses the necessity of responsible,
voluntary decisions about childbearing and using family planning.
A key Cairo objective is to achieve universal access to family plan-
ning by 2015. On the surface, the Cairo platform is a progressive
and equity-oriented approach to reproductive health. Women’s
organizations successfully lobbied to have feminist language about
equity and rights included in the platform. Yet, at the Cairo confer-
ence, a striking coalition formed between population control advo-
cates and feminists around the concept of voluntary, individual
choice with respect to contraceptive use. Banking on high rates of
unmet need for contraceptives in developing countries, the popu-
lation control lobby concluded that their goal of slowing population
growth could be met by backing the feminists’ insistence on high-
quality, voluntary reproductive health care (DeJong 2000; Sinding,
Ross, and Rosenfeld 1994).

is

and high-quality reproductive health services

The human rights approach to reproductive health offers
important protections against coercion and state-driven demo-
graphic targets. Its emphasis on the voluntary use of contracep-
tives
a
significant assertion of women’s reproductive rights. Yet the Cairo
platform assumes that women (as an undifferentiated mass) have
the ability to develop, articulate, and act on reproductive inten-
tions that will be supported by the reproductive health services.
While protection of individual rights is important, research from
a variety of settings demonstrates that sociocultural norms and
gender relations constrain women’s abilities to make autonomous
reproductive choices (Bledsoe 2002; Ginsberg and Rapp 1995;
Lopez 1993; Mamdani 1972; Mondain and Delaunay 2003;
Oppong and Wery 1994). Instead of being domains of individual
choice and action, fertility and reproduction are better thought
of as ‘‘fields of contention’’ in which the interests of men, women,
and the state are often in conflict (Dureau 2001). Reproductive
outcomes reflect negotiations between social actors with poten-
tially conflicting reproductive aims. In contexts with a strong col-
lective preference for high fertility, the ability of Cairo-driven
reforms to increase women’s reproductive agency by establishing
new norms of bodily autonomy is limited.

Overlaps and Disconnects in Reproductive Health Care

329

The Cairo platform’s progress was stalled by the decline of
health systems in the developing world under structural adjust-
ment programs throughout the 1990s. The increasing conservatism
of the United States under the Bush administration, including the
restoration of the Mexico City Policy that denies U.S. funding to
any agencies that offer abortion services or counseling, was a direct
blow to the global reproductive health agenda. The Bush adminis-
tration has blocked American contributions to the United Nations
Population Fund, and USAID and other agencies receiving funds
from the United States have had to curtail their reproductive health
programs. Professionals in the population field find that support
for their programs has been circumvented by the President’s
Emergency Fund for AIDS Relief
(PEPFAR), which currently
receives the largest share of U.S. funding for overseas health pro-
grams. Unsurprisingly in the current chilly climate for reproductive
health, the 10-year anniversary of Cairo passed largely unnoticed.
Given the reality of limited funding and competing priorities,
results to date have fallen short of the global optimism that charac-
terized the period immediately following the ICPO meeting in 1994.

POPULATION POLICY AND FAMILY PLANNING PROJECTS IN
SENEGAL

Like many developing countries, Senegal has received millions of
dollars in development aid for family planning initiatives over
the past 30 years. The first private family planning clinic opened
in 1970, and a local affiliate of the International Planned Parenthood
Federation (the Association Se´ne´galaise pour le bien eˆtre familiale
or ASBEF) opened in 1974. By the end of the 1980s USAID, the
United Nations Fund for Population Activities (UNFPA), and the
Senegalese government had established family planning initiatives
in all ten regions of the country. In 1991, the government created a
national family planning program, the Programme Nationale de
Planification Familiale (PNPF), within the Ministry of Health using
funds from USAID. In recent years, the Ministry of Health has been
restructured to integrate comprehensive reproductive health ser-
vices into the health sector; the PNPF went through several evolu-
tions, becoming the Division de la Sante´ Reproductive in 2002.

In the mid-1990s USAID awarded large contracts to Manage-
ment Sciences for Health (MSH), a Washington, D.C. based health

330 E. E. Foley

agency, to carry out a variety of family planning programs in
coordination with the PNPF. The first
five-year MSH project
(1995–2000) focused on child survival and family planning. It was
designed to address the unmet need for contraceptives highlighted
in an assessment carried out in the early 1990s (Diop et al. 1994).1 At
the end of that first project, USAID renewed the MSH contract for
another five-year cycle, this time with a focus on maternal health
and family planning (2000–2005) and a budget of $7.4 million
(Pollock et al. 2003). The second project sought to improve access
to contraceptives and to raise demand for quality family planning
services, mainly by publicizing the benefits of family planning
and eliciting the support of religious, political, and civic leaders
(Pollock et al. 2003:6).

Despite generous funding from USAID and the cooperation of
the Division of Reproductive Health, the MSH projects did not pro-
duce significant changes in Senegalese women’s contraceptive
behavior or Senegal’s total fertility rate.2 Three decades of family
planning programs have established widespread familiarity with
contraceptives on the part of the Senegalese public, but high fertility
patterns within marriage remain relatively unchanged. Fertility
declined by just over one child per woman between 1975 and
1992. As of the mid-1990s, declining fertility did not appear to
reflect a change in ideal family size or an increase in the use of mod-
ern contraception; instead, changes in fertility appear to stem from
continuing urbanization, increased education of girls, and later age
at marriage (Pison et al. 1995). In 1992=1993, the total fertility rate
was 6.0; this number decreased to 5.7 in 1999 (Ndiaye, Diouf, and
Ayad 1992=1993; SERDHA 1999). The preliminary results from
the 2005 Demographic Health Survey (DHS) show modest declines
in fertility and slight increases in the percentage of women using
modern contraceptives. The total fertility rate is 5.3, with a rural
rate of 6.4 and a rate among urban women of 4.1 (Ministe`re de la
Sante´ 2005). The percentage of women of reproductive age in a
union using contraception is 11.8 percent for all methods and 10.3
percent for modern methods (Ministe`re de la Sante´ 2005).

Information, Education, and Communication and Behavior
Change Communication (IEC=BCC) components have figured
prominently in Senegal’s family planning program, although lack
of awareness of contraception does not seem to be the explanation
for Senegal’s high fertility rates. One demographic survey found
that 94 percent of married women know about family planning,

Overlaps and Disconnects in Reproductive Health Care

331

but this has not translated into demand for services. MSH project
documents express the goal of ‘‘converting high levels of knowl-
edge about family planning and maternal health into increased
use of services’’ (Pollock et al. 2003:11). In the 1990s, MSH carried
out a variety of publicity strategies that included a new family plan-
ning logo, television and radio spots, and the installation of new
signs with the family planning logo at clinics offering family plan-
ning services. These IEC strategies increased the visibility of family
planning in Senegal and sought to increase popular acceptance of
contraceptives (MSH 1996; 1998).

As of the last demographic health survey, only 11.8 percent of
women currently in a union are using any form of contraception
(Ministe`re de la Sante´ 2005). The high visibility of family planning
has yet to translate into higher demand for contraception, largely
because IEC assumes a degree of agency and individual choice that
have little basis in sociocultural realities. Carter, among others, has
pointed out the limitations of demographic approaches that err on
the side of attributing too much or too little agency to individuals
(i.e., individuals mindlessly obey cultural rules or they are always
rational, conscious decision-makers). Instead, he calls for a nuanced
approach to culturally shaped decision-making points that emerge
in the constant flow of social activity (Carter 1995). In the Senega-
lese context, the very small number of decision-making points
when women or couples would choose to use contraception offers
a partial explanation of the failure of IEC campaigns to change
reproductive behavior. The slow decline in total fertility and mod-
est increase in contraceptive use reported in the 2005 DHS poten-
tially stem from multiple factors: powerful
incentives to have
large families, widespread disinterest in using contraception, or
inability to take advantage of increasingly accessible family plan-
ning services. The ethnographic data that follows illustrates that
for women in Saint Louis, a combination of these factors is at play.

GENDER, SEX, AND FERTILITY: THE RECIPE FOR ‘‘REPRODUCTIVE
SUCCESS’’ IN SENEGAL

At first glance, the demographic data from Senegal appears baf-
fling. How does one explain that widespread knowledge of family
planning does not translate into use of contraceptives, particularly
when at least 30 percent of Senegalese women reportedly have an

332 E. E. Foley

unmet need for contraception (Diop et al. 1994; Wilson 1997)? The
answer to this reproductive puzzle lies at the intersection of gender
norms and the socio-economic realities that constrain women’s
abilities to deviate markedly from the culturally sanctioned path
of womanhood and motherhood. The dominant expectation in
Senegal is that through marriage, men gain access to women’s bod-
ily resources: women will be sexually available to their husbands
and produce many children within a stable marital union. In
addition, Wolof women owe their husbands absolute respect and
deference as their kilifa (moral authority figures), and in exchange,
husbands are required to house, feed, clothe, and care for all their
dependents.

The social pressure to conform to gender roles and high parity
within marriage remains powerful even among more educated
women in urban areas (Adjamagbo, Antoine, Dial 2004). For many
women, fulfilling these gendered expectations is the best strategy
available to secure social and economic stability. For those who
would increase contraceptive use and slow Senegal’s population
growth (Cairo’s rejection of demographic goals notwithstanding),
there are two possibilities: fit contraceptive use into the existing
sociocultural model of gender, marriage, and fertility; or change
the model itself to favor longer birth spacing intervals and smaller
families. After over a decade of family planning campaigns and
millions of dollars spent to improve services and promote their
use, there appears to be little progress on either front.

Ethnographic data from my field research points to widespread
cultural consensus on the expected reproductive trajectory for
Senegalese women: virginity before marriage, birth of the first child
within 12 months of consummating the marriage, and steady child-
bearing with birth intervals of two to three years for the remainder
of one’s reproductive career. The extent to which any particular
woman’s reproductive history conforms to these expectations
varies. Urban women, particularly the educated elite, use contra-
ception more than their rural counterparts (18 percent vs. 5 percent)
and not surprisingly have lower fertility rates as well (4.1 vs. 6.4)
(Senegal DHS 2005). Some urban areas are more conservative than
others—Saint Louis has a contraceptive prevalence rate of 6 percent,
making it more similar to rural areas than to other cities such as
Dakar or Ziguinchor. Despite variations among urban areas and
between urban and rural areas, traditional gender norms and expec-
tations concerning marriage and raising children are extremely

Overlaps and Disconnects in Reproductive Health Care

333

resilient; for all but a few Senegalese men and women, marriage is
an obligatory rite of passage (Adjamagbo et al. 2002).

Although bien travailler—that is, to emulate Senegalese standards
for the ideal wife and mother—is the main preoccupation for most
Senegalese women, there are important generational shifts under-
way, particularly in larger urban centers. There has been a steady
increase in first children being born to unmarried women
(Adjamagbo et al. 2002). These data suggest changing sexual prac-
tices, particularly an increase of sexual activity among adolescents
and young adults who are also marrying at a later age (19.9) than
previous generations. Although premarital sex and premarital
childbearing are still considered taboo, if the father agrees to marry
the mother of his child (thereby accepting paternity) immediately
following the child’s birth, the premarital indiscretion is largely
forgivable.

Despite evidence of increasing sexual activity among young
adults, for young, unmarried women, reproductive success means
maintaining virginity (or at least the appearance of virginity) until
marriage. As women’s sexual lives ostensibly begin at marriage,
many young women have little access to information about sex,
contraception, pregnancy, or childbirth during adolescence. Young
women in my study commented on the difficulty of accessing
reproductive health services before marriage. Unmarried women
fear that their parents will assume they are sexually active, preg-
nant, or worse yet, engaging in prostitution, if they express interest
in going to a reproductive health clinic.3 As one young woman told
me: ‘‘One of my mother’s friends might see me there and think I am
pregnant or having an abortion.’’ Unmarried women who seek
reproductive health services risk repercussions from their parents,
older siblings, and neighbors as word spreads that they were spot-
ted at the family planning clinic where, in the words of another
young focus group participant, ‘‘only married women with chil-
dren should be going.’’

Senegal’s demographic health surveys suggests that 30 percent
of Senegalese women have unmet need for contraception. My eth-
nographic evidence suggests that this is likely an overestimate,
but some unmet need does exist, largely among sexually active
unmarried women, often referred to colloquially as ‘‘disquettes.’’
Disquettes are young, trendy, hip, and ultimately ‘‘modern’’ young
women aged approximately 16 to 25 years who trade youth, beauty,
and often their bodies for the attentions and material favors of

334 E. E. Foley

older, often married men (Nyamnjoh 2005). As icons of the new
cosmopolitan social mores in urban Senegal, disquettes are the most
visible affront to conservative sexual norms, but increasingly even
less flashy young women are entering into discreet sexual relation-
ships with their boyfriends. Their hope is that the sexual dimension
of these relationships will remain unknown to their parents, and
sometimes even to their close female friends. This segment of the
female population undoubtedly has the strongest need for birth
control. As a married woman in her mid-20s commented, ‘‘All
my unmarried girlfriends are using birth control, way more than
my married friends. They know it is easier to use contraception
than to try to get an abortion every year.’’

towns and villages.

The social category of disquette is not confined to urban areas per
se, but this visible flaunting of traditional gender norms, parti-
cularly where sex is concerned, is much more understated in smal-
If disquettes could be described as
ler
challenging traditional gender expectations, the normative category
for women is undoubtedly that of jabbar (wife). As marriage is
obligatory for men and women, presumably even the most irrever-
ent disquette will one day trade in her sexual freedom for the cultu-
rally sanctioned role of wife and mother. It is nearly impossible to
find single men or women of any age who do not aspire to marriage
(or remarriage in cases of divorce or death of a spouse). Regardless
of any premarital
the
resounding majority of rural and urban Senegalese embrace the
dominant ideals concerning marital fidelity and steady childbear-
ing. Women are expected to have a child within a year of consum-
mating their marriages, and they will feel a strong sense of unease if
they do not become pregnant soon after they begin having sex with
their husband.

indiscretions, once they have married,

Newly married women rush to demonstrate their procreative
ability, in part to prove their social worth as childbearing wives.
If a woman is joining a polygynous union, she will feel additional
pressure to strengthen her initially tenuous position vis-a`-vis senior
cowives who already have children. Many first time mothers-to-be
do not seek prenatal care because they fear drawing undue atten-
tion to their pregnancies and being on the receiving end of the evil
eye or other jealous malevolence. This avoidance of naming preg-
nancy is thought to ward off evil spirits, harmful jealousy, and
undue attention to women in a vulnerable state. The anxiety of
newly married women seeking to become mothers stems in part

Overlaps and Disconnects in Reproductive Health Care

335

from the homage to woman as mother that pervades popular cul-
ture in rural and urban Senegal. ‘‘For Senegalese, a mother is
sacred,’’ asserts the Mother’s Day edition of the trendy urban maga-
zine Thiof. In the May 2006 issue, national celebrities ranging from
the Minister of Urbanism to Senegal’s star wrestler Moustapha
Gueye sing the praises of their mothers. For most Senegalese, state-
ments such as ‘‘I am indebted to my mother for everything that I
have accomplished in both my professional life and my personal
life’’ (Assane Diagne, Minister of Urbanism) are unremarkable. This
cultural truism is also conveyed in the Wolof proverb Ligeeyu ndey,
anub doom; that is, the achievements of the child come from his
mother’s hard work.

Even the first time visitor to Senegal will notice the ubiquitous
phrase baax yaay (‘‘good mother’’), a dedication in honor of one’s
mother that is plastered on boats, cars, buses, and all manners
of public transportation in rural and urban Senegal. Almost all
Senegalese pop stars have composed songs dedicated to the valiant
efforts their mothers put forth on their behalf. This culture of
‘‘mother worship’’ abounds throughout Senegal, and the image of
the good mother presents a lofty ideal that women strive to emu-
late. When young men of marriageable age begin to think seriously
about courtship, they are as concerned with finding a good mother
for their future children as they are with finding a suitable mate for
themselves. New wives seek to have children early in marriage to
cement their marital bond and to confirm that their husband has
chosen a suitable reproductive partner. In light of the contextual
and interpersonal pressures on women to become mothers, it is
unimaginable for a newly married woman to use contraception
before the birth of her first child.

Marriage and motherhood also mark a woman’s entry into a
complex sphere of female adulthood in which social relationships
take on new material and cultural significance. Financial exchanges
among women at weddings and the subsequent naming ceremon-
ies of their children provide an important opportunity for women
to invest in kin and friendship networks. As one villager told me,
‘‘there are two places where women should spend their money,
on gold and in ceremonies.’’ To celebrate her wedding, a bride
receives cash and other gifts from her husband’s family, her own
family, and a wide circle of relatives and friends. The bride is
expected to carefully note the monetary value of each present and
reciprocate at the ceremonies of all the women who have given

336 E. E. Foley

her gifts. This process is repeated at the naming ceremonies of each
of her children. Although less formal than the rotating credit and
loan associations popular among women throughout Senegal and
West Africa, this system of exchange at weddings and baptisms is
a key domain in which women accrue social and financial capital
(Buggenhagen 2001). Women attend weddings and naming cer-
emonies as guests and begin participating in these networks of
financial exchange when their age cohort begins to marry, but
women experience the full benefits of these networks only upon
marriage and each time they have a child.

In a social world replete with ceremonies, the ngente-taaw (nam-
ing ceremony for a woman’s first child) stands out as the most sig-
nificant in a woman’s life. On this day, women are the center of
their social universe. Ngente take place on the eighth day after the
child’s birth and are held for all children, but the ngente-taaw sur-
passes those of subsequent children. The day begins with a
religious ceremony attended mainly by male relatives and neigh-
bors, but this portion of the day’s events is rapidly eclipsed by a lar-
gely female celebration of the mother and her procreative success.
New mothers prepare for months ahead of time and spend the
day exhibiting dazzling arrays of new clothing and gold jewelry.
At a good ngente, the mother will change her clothes three or four
times over the course of the day and each wardrobe change will
outdo the last.

Most women spend months scrimping and saving to marshal the
resources necessary for such an opulent wardrobe, often at the
expense of other needs. One nurse-midwife complained in frus-
tration that women often refuse to spend money on prenatal care,
choosing instead to direct all their resources toward preparations
for the ngente. The amount of money spent on ngente varies depend-
ing on the family’s resources, but most families incur considerable
debt in order to feed the 300 or more guests who attend an ngente-
taaw. The husband gives his wife a small budget for her clothing
and accessories, but this amount will almost always be supplemen-
ted by the new mother’s own resources, even if she must borrow to
acquire enough money to put on a satisfactory display. Photogra-
phers or videographers often record ngente celebrations, and the
ngente photo album becomes a vibrant archive of the event. In view-
ing and sharing these albums, women relive this all-too-brief cel-
ebration of their cultural and religious value as women and
mothers.

Overlaps and Disconnects in Reproductive Health Care

337

Once a woman has established a benchmark of procreative abil-
ity and has been celebrated as a new mother at the ngente, she will
breastfeed her child for about two years before becoming pregnant
again. In previous generations, a new mother would return to her
natal home after the ngente and stay there until her child was
weaned. During this time, women would receive assistance and
instruction from their own mothers and the separation from their
husbands would prevent early pregnancy. In some cases, women
still return to their mother’s home for two to six months after deliv-
ery, but it is almost unheard of for a woman to stay for over a year;
some women never leave their husband’s house at all. For women
who do stay with their husbands, it would be unusual for the cou-
ple to resume sexual activity before an abstinence period of
approximately 40 days, or until the woman resumes her prayer
schedule. Women who are bleeding or spotting are not ritually
pure, and therefore they can’t pray. In this state, sexual activity is
considered taboo. When a woman returns to performing her ablu-
tions and praying she is sending a signal to her husband that she
is no longer bleeding and is therefore available for sex.

After resuming sexual activity with their husbands, women
might begin to think about delaying their next pregnancy. In Car-
ter’s (1995) framework, this would be the first ‘‘decision-making
point’’ at which a woman or married couple might consider using
contraception to delay pregnancy. Concern with delaying a sub-
sequent pregnancy is more common among urban, educated
women than in their rural counterparts. Rural women reported that
they would not become overly concerned with birth spacing unless
they have experienced one or more incident of nef (becoming preg-
nant before the last child is weaned), and even then, many women
hope that they will ‘‘have better luck next time’’ as opposed to
immediately seeking contraception. In the demographic household
survey I collected in the village of Darou-Mboumbaye, most
women reported birth intervals of 20 to 24 months. Although less
than the stated ideal of 33 months, on average, birth intervals were
not considered to be too short unless they were less than 16 months.
Breastfeeding, periodic abstinence, wearing traditional charms,
withdrawal, and calculating one’s menstrual cycle are all cited by
women as techniques they employ to lengthen birth intervals,
although these strategies account for less than three percent of
Senegal’s low rates of women using any form of birth control
(Ministe`re de la Sante´ 2005). Although women want to avoid nef, the

338 E. E. Foley

statistics regarding unmet needs for contraception appear exagger-
ated. Women counted as having unmet needs in national demo-
graphic surveys are those in sexual unions who are not using
contraception and are not intending to get pregnant. But following
the sociocultural logic of childbearing in Senegal, pregnancies are
not usually something that one typically ‘‘plans’’ or ‘‘intends’’ to
make happen. Childbearing is the natural, expected, and desired
result of sex and marriage. Women who have experienced repeated
instances of having children too close together and are beginning to
feel fatigue are the most likely to make a concerted effort to
lengthen their birth intervals. The statistic of 30 percent of Senega-
lese women having an unmet need for birth control likely conflates
the women who truly do not desire to become pregnant at the time
of the survey with those who are neither ‘‘planning’’ their next birth
nor seeking to delay it. Although the desire for additional children
decreases with parity, over 50 percent of women with five children
report that they desire another child (Ministe`re de la Sante´ 2005).
This finding confirms the resilience of the ideal of high fertility within
marriage, even after decades of family planning campaigns.

Nonetheless, there are women who desire some form of contra-
ception after they have had several children or have experienced
repeated instances of nef. Besides the segment of women who were
sexually active and using birth control before marriage, this is the
first time that most women have navigated family planning clinics
and the contraceptive options available to them. As jabbar, and
often very young jabbar, they face the challenge of balancing the
competing demands of marriage, motherhood, their husband’s
and in-laws’ wishes, and contradictory interpretations of Islam on
family planning. The main challenge in this phase of a woman’s life
is to manage fertility while trying to minimize the social and physi-
cal risks of using family planning.

A DANGEROUS TERRAIN: PERCEIVED SOCIAL AND PHYSICAL
RISKS OF CONTRACEPTION

In the absence of formal education and limited access to biomedical
services, a Pikine woman’s views of contraceptive options and the
risks associated with them develop mainly through sharing experi-
ences and anecdotes with her peers. Common experiences of dis-
ruptive side effects, especially from hormonal methods, come to

Overlaps and Disconnects in Reproductive Health Care

339

signify the powerful and dangerous nature of family planning. Side
effects reported by women to each other include weight gain or
weight loss, continuous bleeding, amenorrhea, unexpected preg-
nancies, delayed return to fertility, and miscarriages. When focus
group discussions turned to the topic of contraception, women
would readily recount stories of their own struggles to find a satis-
factory method.

There is no method that is good. Not one. If it is the pill, there are some who
forget to take it. Me, I forget to take it. You see some women who take two
pills. They [the doctors] tell you to take one, and you take two, and you cre-
ate problems for yourself. You are doing it to yourself. You are taking
something that you aren’t capable of taking correctly, you forget. And
you are taking something, it doesn’t come out when you pee, it doesn’t
come out of you, it just closes up your stomach, grabs your uterus. Eh?
They put something in you that you can’t see and it stops your period from
coming, that can’t be good. All you can say is you aren’t pregnant. You are
happy because you aren’t pregnant. You can be with your husband and
you won’t get pregnant.

This quotation reveals that women are uneasy about using contra-
ceptives that simultaneously prevent pregnancy and transform
one’s bodily experiences of menstruation. The idea of birth control
pills ‘‘closing up the stomach’’ and ‘‘grabbing the uterus’’ reflects a
concern that these are irreversible effects, and if this causes disrup-
tions to one’s menstrual cycle, it ‘‘can’t be good.’’ Second, there is
the tacit understanding that while sex without procreation might
‘‘make you happy,’’ there is a subversive side to this initial happi-
ness that could actually be masking the ways that you are ‘‘creating
problems for yourself.’’

Women who participated in focus groups and informal inter-
views shared numerous stories of serious problems with side
effects.

Sometimes you go [to the clinic] and they tell you that something will be
good for you, you should take it, and you do and then you have problems
later. And it’s not just one or two people who have had problems. Even
me—I used to take the pill. After a while I started to have stomach pain,
it was making me suffer. I got mad and I stopped taking it.

And in another session:

What you are saying happened to me once, because I tried family planning,
and I was taking pills. They told me the pill would make me gain weight.

340 E. E. Foley

But I would take it and every month I would lose a kilo. I didn’t stop taking
it. When I got too weak, that was when I stopped taking it. After I stopped,
my next pregnancy was bad [miscarriage]. It wasn’t good, and it was
because of family planning.

Although this woman complained of weight loss that she attributed
to the birth control pill, a much more common theme was weight
gain. In an interview with an administrator at the Saint Louis
ASBEF center (these centers are often considered the best private
family planning clinics in Senegal), she argued that the inability
to help women cope with side effects was perhaps the chief obstacle
to increasing the use of contraceptives.

Even me, I gained 17 kilos on Depo and I haven’t been able to lose it even
after stopping. Depo can stay in your body for many years, some women
don’t get pregnant for up to two years . . .. The women I speak with, I just
tell them they have to weigh the pros and cons, the inconveniences of fam-
ily planning versus not wanting to become pregnant.

Although ASBEF has made a concerted effort to provide a wel-
coming atmosphere and to counsel women adequately about the
potential side effects of various family planning methods, this
administrator felt that they still struggle to help women choose
the best method for them, or to change methods if they experience
problems.

Women had many concerns related to their bodily experiences
with contraception, but their greatest anxieties were connected to dis-
rupted menstrual cycles. In similar research conducted in Tanzania,
women’s hesitation to use modern methods of contraception
stemmed from fears of cancer, perceived threats to future fertility,
and harmful side effects, in addition to concern about irregular per-
iods (Allen 2002). This finding echoes Kaler’s data from Zimbabwe,
in which women reported that menstrual irregularities were both
inconvenient and potentially dangerous because of the necessary
cleaning and regulatory role of menstruation. Shona beliefs about
the dangers of having sex when one is not experiencing regular
menstrual cycles created disruptions in couples’ sexual lives when
birth control caused amenorrhea in women (Kaler 2003). While
disrupted menstrual cycles were the major disincentive to using con-
traception, other aspects of modern contraceptives also posed dilem-
mas for would-be users in Zimbabwe. The absence of an ‘‘antidote’’
to reverse the effects of modern contraceptives were also troubling

Overlaps and Disconnects in Reproductive Health Care

341

to the Shona, since traditional methods of birth control had effective
medicinal counterparts that would quickly return a woman to
fertility (Kaler 2003).

As in these other ethnographic examples, women in Pikine were
concerned about both the physiological effects of irregular men-
strual cycles and the tensions this might create with their husbands.
No matter what they had been told during their clinical encounters,
most women could not accept that frequent spotting or complete
lack of bleeding could be considered normal side effects:

Even the pills that you think are good can cause problems, or the shot. If
you get the shot you don’t get your period. Every month the blood is sup-
posed to come out and you get the shot and it doesn’t come out. You swell
up and gain lots of weight. It is causing you a serious problem and you
don’t know what the end result will be. [It is] something that you are sup-
posed to see every month, and you have done something that keeps it from
coming. The stuff that is not coming out, it is backing up somewhere and
then you are gaining weight. And you say to yourself ‘‘I have gained
weight, it is good for me,’’ but there is another problem hiding under the
surface and you don’t know it.

When it comes to family planning, there are a lot of risks. If it is the pills
that you are taking, you can take them and they can be in your uterus
and cause you problems. If it is the shot, they tell you that sometimes if
you take the shot and you stop, you might be able to get pregnant again
or you might not.

Although women found a complete lack of menstrual bleeding
alarming, frequent bleeding also presents a great disturbance to
daily life. Rather than just being a nuisance, irregular bleeding
interferes with women’s religious practice and their ability to be
sexually available to their husbands—both of which are considered
serious disruptions to daily life and harmonious conjugal relations.
Most married women expend a tremendous amount of time,
energy, and discretionary income making and purchasing erotic
products (incense, waist beads, lingerie) that will help maintain
their husband’s sexual interest. Women view their sexual desir-
ability as one of the most important points of leverage for hanging
on to a husband or for countering the similar attentions he might be
receiving from other wives or possible mistresses. Women under-
standably become worried when hormonal contraceptives cause
frequent bleeding that interferes with their ability to seduce and
satisfy their male partners.

342 E. E. Foley

Other focus group conversations turned to women’s strategies in
the face of men’s potential opposition to family planning, parti-
cularly in light of perceived physical hazards. Some women are
willing to use contraception covertly to avoid the potential oppo-
sition of
their in-laws and husbands, as highlighted in this
exchange.

NG: There are also a lot of women who do planning and most of them have
not told their in-laws. There are some who don’t tell their husbands; they
just steal away and go. Or they tell them they are going to the market
and they go to ASBEF. Or they say they are taking out the trash and they
go to the dispensary.

EF: Do they think their husbands would refuse if asked?
NG: Yes, or your mother-in-law will say to your husband ‘‘you are limit-
ing the number of children you are having.’’ If that happens, you say you
are going to one place, and you go to another.

Although some women use family planning unbeknownst to their
husbands and in-laws, this is a gamble that could have disastrous
physical and social consequences. In what many women agreed
would be the worst-case scenario, a woman who uses contraception
might jeopardize her future fertility and the stability of her mar-
riage.

. . . those who have husbands and take it, they could get to the point where
they can’t have kids anymore. If that happens, their husbands will put
them aside and go look for a second wife. He will say he wants kids, what
can he do? And she will have brought this on herself.

As conveyed in this comment, the specter of a cowife who might
arrive sooner rather than later if a woman can’t live up to repro-
ductive expectations also enters into women’s fears about contra-
ception. The arrival of a cowife can also change the pace of
women’s childbearing. Newly married second wives (~nnaarel) often
try to establish their social position in the household by having sev-
eral children in rapid succession to ‘‘catch up’’ with the senior wife.
For their part, first wives (aw) might seek to become pregnant soon
after being joined by a cowife to counter the perceived reproductive
threat of the new and typically younger wife.

These findings are consistent with ethnographic realities else-
where in sub-Saharan Africa, where anthropologists have described
how women’s reproductive needs and interests are shaped not
only by the value of children, but by their social status in

Overlaps and Disconnects in Reproductive Health Care

343

multigenerational polygynous households and the strength of their
marital relationships (Bledsoe 2002; Feldman-Savelsberg 1999; Kaler
2003). The desirability of pregnancy and additional children is not
constant throughout women’s reproductive lives;
instead, their
relative value shifts as women’s structural positions change
throughout the course of their marriages and the life cycle (Bledsoe
2002). For Wolof women, these types of social calculations influence
the pace and timing of pregnancies and constitute different
decision-making points than those presented by repeat incidences
of nef.

Distinct fears about losing one’s capacity to have children and
the potentially lengthy period to return to fecundity surfaced as a
strong disincentive for using contraception before marriage and
after becoming married:

Women should not have just one kid and then go do planning. You should
wait until you have several and then go do planning. You shouldn’t just
have your first child and then go—you could end up not having any more
kids.

This ultimate fear of sterility from using contraception appears in
other accounts of reproduction; in many contexts, the often slow
return to a regular menstrual cycle after using hormonal methods
aggravates pre-existing anxieties about the link between contracep-
tive use and infertility (Allen 2002; Kaler 2003). The comments
above reiterate Wolof women’s concerns about the risks of family
planning, but they also suggest little sympathy for women who
might knowingly jeopardize their reproductive potential by using
contraception, as such a woman would have ‘‘brought this on her-
self.’’ One young woman expressed her fears that she had caused
her own infertility by using contraception with her husband before
they were married. Despite her university-level education, she was
beginning to blame herself for their inability to conceive.

I stopped taking the pill, but until now I haven’t gotten pregnant [two
years]. Everyone says that you shouldn’t do planning before you have a
kid. You hear lots of stories. Even a family planning counselor told me I
shouldn’t have done it. You begin to believe in it . . . or maybe we just don’t
know how to use them right. Who knows? But in my case, they are going to
say that it was the pill that did it to me.

Rather than increasing her sense of agency and self-determination,
in this case the use of contraception before marriage led this young

344 E. E. Foley

woman to wonder if she were to blame for her apparent infertility.
In addition to struggling with potential reproductive failure, her
sense of guilt and self-blame was often unbearable. She felt she
was failing as a wife and losing esteem in the eyes of her in-laws.
Another interview with a woman in her late 20 s was illustrative
of the logic that informs women’s fertility strategies, and how it
stems from significant social and economic concerns embedded
within the cultural emphasis on motherhood and high fertility.
When I asked her if she thought there was societal pressure on
women to have many children she responded, ‘‘Not at all. Women
love to give their husbands lots of children. Especially with polyg-
amy.’’ When prompted to elaborate she added,
‘‘the woman’s
inheritance [from her husband] will be proportional to the number
of children she has,’’ and a woman without children, ‘‘won’t have
anything except what her husband gives her before he dies.’’ Under
Islamic law, sons receive a larger share of their father’s estate than
daughters (and widows receive a very small portion), so a woman
in a polygynous union who is concerned about securing access to
her husband’s assets will feel additional pressure to produce sons.
The fear of being a widow ‘‘left with nothing’’ surfaced repeatedly
in discussions of why childbearing is important to women’s future
security. As women in polygynous unions gain power and social
status in the household through their children, and additional chil-
dren increase their share of their husband’s estate, competition
among cowives can have a considerable influence on reproductive
strategies.

Fears of childlessness or having too few children resonate among
women, social strategies to cope with infertility notwithstanding. In
other African contexts, talk of infertility can serve as a means for
expressing wider social anxieties about political and social change,
as in Feldman-Savelsberg’s research among the Bangangte´
in
Cameroon. As social and economic instability increased, so did
Bangangte´ women’s anxieties about fertility and adequate repro-
duction (Feldman-Savelsberg 1999). Women in my research
expressed similar anxieties, but these fears were conveyed in the
context of women’s personal fate and future security. Their con-
cerns about reproduction and infertility could potentially be ana-
lyzed as
and economic
vulnerability, but in their personal narratives these were expressed
as concerns about the relative security of their marriages and social
position within their household. Bangangte´ women also share these

on broader

commentary

social

Overlaps and Disconnects in Reproductive Health Care

345

concerns, since infertility denies them the full adult status of
motherhood and can contribute to their impoverishment through
loss of child labor and insecure positions in the household vis a`
vis their cowives (Feldman-Savelsberg 1999).

There are several therapeutic strategies that come into play in
Senegal when reproduction does not
take place as expected.
Women who do not become pregnant within a year of getting mar-
ried will seek treatment from a healer and=or access biomedical
care. The dominant explanation for infertility is that a woman has
a far u rabb, or a spirit boyfriend who is inhabiting her body and
jealously preventing her husband from impregnating her. In some
cases, healers can appease and remove the spirit boyfriend, often
by using charms that incorporate verses from the Koran. Women
without children spend years seeking treatment and in the mean-
time, they will usually receive a foster child from one of their sib-
lings, often an older sister. For a variety of reasons, some of
which stem from the Muslim preoccupation with paternity and eth-
nic concerns about caste status, adoption in cases where there are
no family ties between the parents and the foster child or little is
known about the child’s family background is extremely uncom-
mon. Despite social and medical strategies for coping with infer-
tility, women who participated in my research displayed a
tremendous concern with having their own children. Biological
children strengthen marital ties, prove one’s status as a woman,
ease relationships with in-laws, allow women to participate in
reciprocal gift-giving occasions, and offer the promise of social
security in old age.

For women in Pikine, informal conversations and first- and
second-hand accounts form the basis of knowledge of the risks
and benefits of using contraception. The potential consequences
of using contraception include difficulty conceiving, miscarriages,
or jeopardizing one’s fertility altogether. The looming threat of
these problems means that many women have little interest in con-
traception, and they find that contraception is appropriate only in
very specific situations. Despite these perceived risks, there are
legitimate uses of family planning given the widespread agreement
that it is harmful to both mother and child if women have children
too close together.

Among married women who participated in my research in
Saint Louis, the parameters of acceptable family planning are very
narrowly defined. There was nearly unanimous consensus among

346 E. E. Foley

research participants that family planning is appropriate mainly for
married women who have a history of nef, that is, those who have a
child almost every year when not using contraception. In this way,
family planning can be used to give women a rest (noppalu) so that
they do not become exhausted from having too many children in
quick succession. Bledsoe’s work in the Gambia demonstrates that
women often use birth control to get a rest precisely because they
think such a rest will give them a greater chance of achieving high
parity (Bledsoe 2002). I did not encounter high parity as a motiv-
ation for using contraception, but women agree that family plan-
ning is intended to give women a break, and not
to end
childbearing.

Women cited marriage as a prerequisite for appropriate
family planning; although premarital sex and teen pregnancy
are on the rise, sex outside marriage is considered immoral. In
Kaler’s oral history interviews in Zimbabwe, she encountered
much evidence that husbands and family planning counselors
had worried about the effects that access to contraceptives might
have on women’s promiscuity. Male objections to contraceptives
were often connected to concerns that men would lose control
over female sexuality if women were given the means to prevent
pregnancy (Kaler 2003). The moral objections that were raised
by my female research participants emerged as negative
commentary on their immoral peers, who were thought to be
defying collective gender norms and expectations
they
used contraception to have marital or extramarital sex without
consequence.

if

Most of the women who participated in focus group discussions
criticized women who used contraceptives inappropriately or out-
side the bounds of ‘‘acceptable’’ use. Participants accused these
women of wanting to have fun and shirk their responsibilities,
either by having premarital sex or by having sex with their hus-
bands (or even other men) without becoming pregnant.

Even here at the clinic they explain to us that there are some women who
shouldn’t do family planning. The women who only have one child, or
women whose children are spaced two years apart, those women shouldn’t
do planning. Planning was created for women who have a baby every year.
But women my age (mid-twenties) who want to get dressed up and
strut around—they want to have one kid and then go to ASBEF or the
dispensary.

Overlaps and Disconnects in Reproductive Health Care

347

Although women recognized the advantages of preventing nef, the
potential use of contraception to have illicit sex or even marital sex
without fear of pregnancy violated collective understandings of sanc-
tioned procreative sex rooted in both Islam and Wolof cultural values.
Among the youngest focus group participants, those aged 18 to
30, many of whom were unmarried or newly married, there was
similar dismay and strong resistance to the idea of young unmar-
ried women or women with few children using contraception.

Even the students are taking it now. The young girls who don’t even have
husbands are taking it!

There are some that go there [the clinic] when they get off work, or they go
when they are done with school. There are some women who don’t have
husbands; they just want to do bad things. The person who wants bad
things, they will look for bad things.

Premarital sex is still considered taboo and young women criti-
cized their peers for using contraception before marriage or before
giving birth to several children. Some family planning clinics refuse
to provide services to unmarried women or married women who
have not obtained their husband’s permission to use contraception.
Although there are indications that cultural norms, particularly in
urban centers, are shifting with respect to premarital sex and access
to reproductive health care for adolescents and unmarried women
(Katz and Nare 2002; Mondain and Delaunay 2003), the cultural
model of reproductive behavior in Senegal remains oriented to high
parity within marriage. Reproductive health services are increas-
ingly being offered to adolescents, but mainstream perceptions of
appropriate family planning remain very narrowly defined as birth
spacing within marriage after other methods of spacing have failed.

TOWARD A WOMAN-CENTERED REPRODUCTIVE
HEALTH AGENDA?

The Cairo UNPD meeting in 1994 marked a turning point in global
reproductive health policy as a commitment to reproductive rights;
voluntary contraceptive use and improving the quality of
reproductive health services have become the foci of many family
planning programs in the developing world. In the rhetoric of
global health policy there has been a distinct shift away from

348 E. E. Foley

implementing family planning programs with the intent of slowing
population growth. Instead, women and men will be ‘‘empowered’’
by the new approach to reproductive health in which informed,
individual choices about contraceptive use are the desired result.
Despite global optimism after the Cairo meeting, the implemen-
tation of the new reproductive health agenda has proven difficult
in many places for health ministries and donors alike (DeJong
2000; Tantchou and Wilson 2000; Wilson 1997).

The human rights approach to reproductive health emphasizes
voluntary use of contraceptives and meeting individual needs.
The recognition of women’s bodily autonomy, and the individual
right of both men and women to make informed reproductive
choices, marks an important turning point in the history of popu-
lation control and family planning services. Yet, the widespread
hopes that the Cairo agenda would successfully empower women
to make independent reproductive choices seem naı¨ve at best.
The human rights approach oversimplifies the social construction
of women’s (and men’s) reproductive desires, and it ignores the
structural constraints on women’s ability to articulate reproductive
intentions or assert bodily autonomy in ways that transgress domi-
nant social norms. Rather than address these constraints directly,
family planning programs promote the use of contraceptives with-
out implementing a more strategic agenda of gender equality to
expand women’s life options beyond the cultural formula for repro-
ductive success. Programs and policies that would challenge the
socio-economic and political dimensions of existing gender hierar-
chies are notably absent from discussions about reproductive health
in Senegal.

This disjuncture between broad global and national health poli-
cies and the specific, contextualized sets of concerns of nation-states
and particular groups of men and women has been identified as a
key obstacle to improving women’s reproductive health in other
contexts (Allen 2002; Dureau 2001).
the
implementation of the Safe Motherhood initiative in Tanzania,
Allen argued that this international health intervention privileged
a generalized, simplified understanding of risk that masked the
complexity and variability of maternal risk in particular settings.
The official definitions of maternal risk implicit in global policies
may have little correspondence with women’s most acute concerns.
While local and national discourses emphasized the risks of mother-
hood, women in her research were equally concerned with risks to

In her analysis of

Overlaps and Disconnects in Reproductive Health Care

349

motherhood (Allen 2002). Similarly, Senegal’s national
family
planning campaigns continually stress the risks of high fertility,
but never acknowledge women’s concerns about risks to their fer-
tility and their desire to have many children. In each case, well-
intentioned global policies to protect women’s health end up
having little relevance when implemented in specific locations.

Thinking beyond Cairo’s flaws, Senegal has been a front-runner
in implementing the progressive reproductive health reforms asso-
ciated with Cairo. The Health Ministry was quick to follow emerg-
ing global trends of integrating family planning, STI=HIV=AIDS
diagnosis and treatment, and infertility services. Reproductive
health care is being extended to youth and adolescents, and posta-
bortion care services are increasingly available. One of the primary
objectives of the Division of Reproductive Health and USAID-
funded projects is to make high quality family planning services
more accessible to the Senegalese population. High-quality care
includes offering a complete array of contraceptive methods (except
abortion, which is illegal), sufficient counseling in maternal-child
health and family planning, and adequate management and treat-
ment of side effects (Management Sciences for Health 1996; 1998;
Pollock et al. 2003). These criteria echo women’s concerns about
the care they receive in government health clinics. Women in Pikine
complained that their medical consultations are too brief, that they
are not given thorough physical exams, and that contraceptive side
effects are not explained adequately.

Despite its innovative and progressive reproductive health pro-
gram and the Cairo directives, the Senegalese government remains
concerned about population growth and the Ministry of Health
continues to include demographic objectives in the national health
plan. Health planners had hoped to see a contraceptive prevalence
rate of 16 percent by 2002 (Ministe`re de la Sante´ 1997a) but as of the
most recent demographic survey this rate has only reached 14 per-
cent (Ministe`re de la Sante´ 2006). The total fertility rate is slowly
declining and there have been slight increases in the proportion
of women using contraceptives over the past ten years. These
trends indicate women’s interest
in reproductive health care,
including contraceptives, at particular moments in their repro-
ductive careers, such as before marriage or after repeated incidents
of nef. Nonetheless, women’s preferences about ideal family size
and birth spacing intervals are virtually identical
in 1997 and
2005 (Ministe`re de la Sante´ 1997; 2005). To the extent that women

350 E. E. Foley

‘‘plan’’ their families, most expect to have five or more children.
The current family planning program emphasizes the health and
material advantages of using contraception, but this contraceptive
logic speaks to only a small portion of women’s reproductive health
concerns.

Reproduction and fertility are complex social phenomena, not
individual medical choices. Yet, national reproductive health pro-
grams continue to approach contraceptive use as a technical prob-
lem stemming from low-quality care or limited knowledge of the
benefits of contraception. More than two decades of efforts to pro-
mote contraceptive use beyond the parameters of culturally defined
‘‘appropriate family planning’’ have had limited success. The mod-
est changes in Senegal’s national fertility rate over the past decade
implies that women and men have ignored or resisted attempts by
the state and bilateral donors to change their reproductive behavior.
Senegalese women understand that their long-term social and
material security involves strategic deployment of their bodily
resources, and this translates into having many children within a
marital union. The enormous discrepancy between the percentage
of women familiar with family planning and the slight percentage
of women using any form of contraception illustrates that the bio-
politics of gender, sex, marriage, and reproduction exerts a firm
grip on women’s bodies. This grip cannot be countered by family
planning publicity campaigns or global
initiatives designed to
empower women by establishing new norms of autonomous indi-
vidual choice in reproduction. Until there are additional social
and economic possibilities for women, Senegal’s fertility rates and
women’s life options will only be minimally affected by increasing
women’s access to contraceptives and high-quality reproductive
health care.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Special thanks to Kiran Asher, Cheikh Babou, Josh Berson, Elise
Carpenter, Vale´rie Delaunay, Julie Livingston, Francis Nyamnjoh,
Joy Rohde, Sue Schneider, and the anonymous reviewers for
insightful comments that greatly strengthened the arguments in
the article. Thanks to Amina Fall, Becca Schwartz and Anne Langdji
for help with data collection. The research for this article was
assisted by funds from the U.S. Department of Education

Overlaps and Disconnects in Reproductive Health Care

351

Fulbright-Hays Doctoral Dissertation Abroad Fellowship, a fellow-
ship from the International Dissertation Field Research Fellowship
Program of the Social Science Research Council with funds pro-
vided by the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, and a National
Science Foundation dissertation enhancement award. A briefer ver-
sion of the analysis presented here was published in my doctoral
dissertation, In Sickness and in Health: Responding to Disease
and Promoting Health in Senegal, Ph.D. dissertation, Michigan
State University, East Lansing, Michigan, 2002.

NOTES

1. Unmet need is defined as the percentage of women of reproductive age who are

sexually active and not using contraception who do not desire to be pregnant.

2. The contraceptive prevalence rate (CPR) was 9.8 percent at the time of the MH=FP
project’s interim assessment in 2003, but the project had hoped to achieve a CPR of
16 percent by 2002 (Pollock et al. 2003:33; Management Sciences for Health 2003).
3. Reproductive services geared to adolescents are still uncommon, but ASBEF has
been extremely pro-active in its attempts to offer services to this population. It
has opened reproductive health centers for youth and adolescents in Dakar and
Richard Toll.

REFERENCES

Adjamagbo, A. and P. Antoine

2002 Mutations de´mographiques au Se´ne´gal et politique de population. In La
socie´te´ se´ne´galaise: entre le global et le local. Momar-Coumba Diop, ed.
Pp. 517–553. Paris: Karthala.

Adjamagbo, A., P. Antoine, and F. B. Dial

2004 Le dilemme des Dakaroises: entre travailler et «bien travailler».

In
Gouverner le Se´ne´gal: Entre ajustement structurel et de´veloppement dur-
able. Momar-Coumba Diop, ed. Pp. 247–272. Paris: Karthala.

Allen, D. R.

2002 Managing Motherhood, Managing Risk: Fertility and Danger in West

Central Tanzania. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

Anrudh, J. and J. Bruce

1994 A Reproductive Health Approach to the Objectives and Assessment of
Family Planning Programs. In Population Studies Reconsidered: Health,
Empowerment, and Rights. G. Sen, A. Germain, and L. Chen, eds. Pp.
193–211. Boston: Harvard University Press.

Bledsoe, C.

2002 Contingent Lives: Fertility, Time, and Aging in West Africa. Chicago:

University of Chicago Press.

352 E. E. Foley

Buggenhagen, B. A.

2001 Prophets and Profits: Gendered and Generational Visions of Wealth and
Value in Senegalese Murid Households. Journal of Religion in Africa
31(4):373–401.

Carter, A.

1995 Agency and Fertility: For an Ethnography of Practice. In Situating Fertility:
Anthropological and Demographic Inquiry. Susan Greenhalgh, ed. Pp.
55–85. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Connelly, M.

2003 Population Control is History: New Perspectives on the International Cam-
paign to Limit Population Growth. Society for Comparative Study of Society
and History 45(1):122–147.

DeJong, J.

2000 The Role and Limitations of the Cairo International Conference on Popu-

lation and Development. Social Science and Medicine 51:941–953.

Diop, M., I. Diop Toure´, and N. Diop, D. Sanogo and A. Aplogan.

1994 Analyse Situationnelle du Syste`me de Prestation de Services de Planifica-
tion Familiale au Se´ne´gal. Dakar: Ministe`re de la Sante´ et de l’Action
Sociale, statistiques de´mographiques. Calverton, MD: Macro International.

Dureau, C. M.

2001 Mutual Goals? Family Planning on Simbo, Western Solomon Islands. In Bor-
ders of Being: Citizenship, Fertility, and Sexuality in Asia and the Pacific.
Margaret Ann Jolly and Kalpana Rajeswari Ram, eds. Pp. 232–261. Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

Feldman-Savelsberg, P.

1999 Plundered Kitchens, Empty Wombs: Threatened Reproduction and Identity

in the Cameroon Grassfields. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

Foley, E.

2001 No Money, No Care: Women and Health Sector Reform in Senegal. Urban
Anthropology and Studies of Cultural Systems and World Economic Devel-
opment 30:1–50.

2002 In Sickness and in Health: Responding to Disease and Promoting Health
in Senegal. Ph.D. dissertation, Michigan State University, East Lansing,
Michigan.

Ginsberg, F. D. and R. Rapp, eds.

1995 Conceiving the New World Order. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Hartmann, B.

1995 Reproductive Rights and Wrongs: The Global Politics of Population Control

and Contraceptive Choice. New York: Harper Collins.

Kaler, A.

2003 Running After Pills: Politics, Gender, and Contraception in Colonial

Zimbabwe. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.

Katz, K. and C. Nare

2003 Reproductive Health Knowledge and Use of Services among Young Adults

in Dakar, Senegal. Journal of Biosocial Sciences 34:215–231.

Lopez, I. O.

1993 Agency and Constraint: Sterilization and Reproductive Freedom among
Puerto Rican Women in New York City. Urban Anthropology and Studies
of Cultural Systems 22(3=4):299.

Overlaps and Disconnects in Reproductive Health Care

353

Mamdani, M.

1972 The Myth of Population Control: Family, Caste, and Class in an Indian Vil-

lage. New York: Monthly Review Press.

Management Sciences for Health

1996 Report on the Midterm Internal Evaluation Senegal Child Survival=Family

Planning Project. Boston: Management Sciences for Health.

1998 Monitoring Report and Workplan: Survie de L’Enfant=Planification Famil-

iale. Boston: Management Sciences for Health.

2003 Projet Sante´ Maternelle et Planification Familiale: Rapport d’Activite´s

Mai-Aout.

Ministe`re de la Sante´ Publique et de l’Action Sociale

1997a Plan Nationale de Developpement Sanitaire et Social du Se´ne´gal (PNDSS)
1998–2007. Dakar: Se´ne´gal. Available at: http://www.sante.gouv.sn/
Programmes/pdis/PNDSS.htm#_Toc44905563.

1997b Programme de Developpement Integre de la Sante´ et de l’Action Sociale
(PDIS) 1998–2002. Dakar: Senegal. Available at: http://www.sante.
gouv.sn/Programmes/pdis/PDIS_attribution.htm.

Ministe`re de la Sante´ Publique et de la Pre´vention Me´dicale
2005 Se´ne´gal Enquete De´mographique et de Sante´, Rapport Pre´liminaire. Centre
de Recherche pour le De´veloppement Humain, Dakar, Se´ne´gal, MEASURE
DHSþ, ORC Macro: Calverton, Maryland.

2006 Annuaire Statistique 2005, Version Finale. Dakar: Service Nationale de

l’Information Sanitaire.

Mondain, N. and V. Delaunay

2003 Life before Marriage: Changes in Couple Formation and Premarital Preg-
nancies among the Sereer Sin in Senegal. Working Paper Series, 13(3):
1–32. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Center for Population and Development
Studies.

Ndiaye, S., M. Ayad, and A. Gaye

1997 Enqueˆte de´mographique et de sante´ au Se´ne´gal (EDS-III). Dakar, Se´ne´gal:
Ministe`re de l’e´conomie, des finances et du plan, Direction de la pre´vision
et de la statistique, Division des statistiques de´mographiques; Calverton,
MD: Macro International.

Ndiaye, S., P. D. Diouf, and M. Ayad

1992=1993 Enqueˆte Demographiqe et de Sante´ au Se´ne´gal (EDS-II). Dakar:
Ministe`re de l’E´ conomie, des Finances, et du Plan, Direction de la pre´-
vision et de la statistique, Division des statistiques de´mographiques.

Nyamnjoh, F.

2005 Fishing in Troubled Waters: Disquettes and Thiofs in Dakar. Africa

75(3):295–324.

Oppong, C. and R. Wery

1994 Women’s Roles and Demographic Change in Sub-Saharan Africa. Liege:
Belgium, International Union for the Scientific Study of Population [IUSSP].

Pison, G., K. Hill, and B. Cohen, and K. Foote, eds.

1995 Population Dynamics of Senegal. Washington, D.C.: National Academies

Press.

Pollock, J., M. Bryant, J. McKenney, A. Sow

2003 Senegal Maternal Health=Family Planning Project (SM=PF) Interim Assess-

ment. Boston: Management Sciences for Health, November.

354 E. E. Foley

Sall, E. H. I.

1999 Statement to the Hague Forum on ICPDþ 5. Ministry of Economy, Finance,
and Planning, Senegal. Available at: http://www.un.org/popin/icpd/
icpd5/hague/senegal.pdf.

SERDHA

1999 Enqueˆte de´mographique et de sante´ au Se´ne´gal (EDS-IV). Ministe`re de
l’e´conomie, des finances et du plan, Direction de la pre´vision et de la
statistique, Division des statistiques de´mographiques. Calverton, MD:
MacroInternational.

Sinding, S., J. Ross, and A. Rosenfeld

1994 Seeking Common Ground: Demographic Goals and Individual Choice.

Washington, D.C.: Population Reference Bureau.

Tantchou J. and E. Wilson

2000 Post-Cairo Reproductive Health Policies and Programs: A Study of Five
Francophone African Countries. The Policy Project. Available at: http://
www.policyproject.com/pubs/occasional/op-06.pdf.

Wilson, E.

1997 Reproductive Health Case Study: Senegal. Washington, D.C.: The Futures

Group International.

