Papers in  this set:

6 Promoting a Smallholder-Centred Approach to Irrigation: Lessons from
Village Irrigation Schemes in the Senegal River Valley by Geert Diemer,
Boubacar Fall and Frans P Huibers

7  Structural Adjustment and Irrigated Agriculture in Senegal by Philip

Woodhouse  and  Ibrahima Ndiaye

8 Large-Scale Irrigation Schemes in Northern Cameroon: Development and

Disengagement  by  Achille  Bikoi

9 

Design  and  Operation  of a  Small  Irrigation  Project  in  Zimbabwe  to
Minimise  Schistosomiasis  Transmission  by  M  Chimbari,  R  J  Chitsiko,
P Bolton, and A J Thomson

Please send comments on this paper to the author or to:

Linden Vincent, Editor, Irrigation Management Network (African Edition)
Overseas Development Institute,  Regent's  College, Inner Circle,  Regents
Park, London NW1  4NS

Comments  received  by  the  Editor  may  be  used  in  future  Newsletters  or
Network Papers

The  opinions  represented  are  those  of  the  author  and  do  not  necessarily
reflect  the  policies  of  the  Overseas  Development  Institute,  or  any
organisation with which  the Institute or author is connected.

PROMOTING A SMALLHOLDER-CENTRED

APPROACH TO IRRIGATION:

LESSONS FROM VILLAGE IRRIGATION SCHEMES

IN THE SENEGAL RIVER VALLEY1

by Geert Diemer, Boubacar Fall and Frans P Huibers2

Contents

Foreword

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

Irrigation in Africa:  Two Different  Contexts

Some  Characteristics of the Original Schemes

Current Planning and Design of Hydro-Agricultural
Schemes

The Sociology of Irrigation in Africa

The Relative Success of Village Irrigation Schemes
Along the Senegal  River

Pointers  for More Effective Planning and Design
Methods

Conclusions

Recommendations

References

Page

3

4

4

6

8

11

17

20

22

24

1  This  article  is  based  on  our  submission  to  the  International  Conference  on  the
Crisis  in  African  Agriculture,  organised  by  the  Cheik  Anta  Diop  University  in
Dakar from  17-23  December  1988.

2  Geert Diemer and Frans P Huibers are attached to the Irrigation and Water and
Soil  Conservation  Department  of  Wageningen  Agricultural  University,  The
Netherlands.  Boubacar  Fall  worked  for  the  West  Africa  Rice  Development
Association  (WARDA) between  1986 and  1989.

PROMOTING A SMALLHOLDER-CENTRED

APPROACH TO IRRIGATION:

LESSONS FROM VILLAGE IRRIGATION  SCHEMES

IN THE SENEGAL RIVER VALLEY

by Geert Diemer, Boubacar Fall and Frans P Huibers

FOREWORD

Many  planners  and  technicians  feel  that  the  development  of  irrigation
systems could  offer a solution to the crisis  in  food  production  in Africa.

Irrigation  seems  to  be  an  appropriate  response  to  the  harmful  effects  of
irregular  rainfall  and  frequent  droughts.  Moreover,  irrigation  seems  to
provide  planners  with  the  institutional  means  to  channel  smallfarmer
production in accordance with national planning objectives.  This is because
current  norms  regulating  the  economic  planning  and  technical  design  of
hydro-agricultural schemes3 require centralised management of the hydraulic
network.

In  this  paper,  we  examine  the  empirical  validity  of these  norms.  Having
identified  the  trends  common  to  colonial  and  post-colonial  policy  with
regard  to  agricultural  development,  we  briefly  review  the  historical
background to the emergence of the current  design procedures for hydro-
agricultural schemes.  We analyse the sociological research dealing with the
phenomenon  of  irrigation  in  Africa,  from  the  point  of  view  of  its
contribution  to  the  analysis  of the  crisis  in  hydro-agricultural  production.
We  then  identify  the  factors  which  explain  an  isolated  case  of  success,
namely the village irrigation schemes in the middle regions of the Senegal
river  valley.  We  pinpoint  two  factors  governing  the  viability  of  hydro-
agricultural  infrastructure, viz,  the dynamics of the smallfarmer production
system  and  the  local  political  system.  We  conclude  by  presenting  the
changes  needed  in  terms  of  planning  and  designing  hydro-agricultural
schemes.

1. 

IRRIGATION IN AFRICA: TWO DIFFERENT CONTEXTS

People  who  speak  of a  crisis  in  the  development  of irrigation  systems  in
Africa  should  confine  their  remarks  to  projects  which  are  not  generated
from within local societies.  These interventions may be contrasted with the
perfectly viable schemes set up by the Taita, Chagga, Meru, Pokot and many
other  peoples  in  the  Rift  Valley,  East  Africa.  Other  examples  are  the
polders  established  and  managed by Baga,  Balanta,  Diola,  Mandinka  and
other smallfarmer societies in the marshlands of the Atlantic Coast and the
gardens set up in the dunes by Wolof smallholders, to mention but a  few.
In  other words,  the  crisis  shows  itself in  irrigation  schemes  designed  and
managed by technicians from the outside.

Like African hydro-agricultural techniques and any other techniques, these
irrigation  interventions  were  developed  in  specific  contexts  for  specific
purposes. The irrigation techniques in the 'land of water' - the Netherlands
-  were  not  a  result  of the  fight  against  the  encroaching  sea,  but  a  legacy
from  the  colonial  conquest  of the  island  of Java  in  present-day Indonesia.
To be  more  specific,  they  have  their  origins  in  the  development  of sugar-
cane as a cash crop.  Irrigation schemes covering hundreds of hectares were
set up and managed by a single owner: the sugar company.

French  irrigation  techniques  date  back  to  the  1820s  in  Senegal,  where
irrigated  plantations  for  the  production  of  rice  and  dye-producing  plants
were  established  in  the  Senegal  river  delta.  These  techniques were  then
transplanted to Morocco, to develop commercial agriculture for the colonial
settlers,  and  to  the  interior  delta  of  the  Niger  river  in  present-day  Mali.
Schemes along the Niger were intended to produce cotton for metropolitan
industry,  like  the  schemes  established by  the  English on  the banks of the
Nile in present-day Sudan.  These irrigation techniques were thus developed
in situations with two specific characteristics: domination of the local people
and  the  intention  to  mobilise  resources  (water,  soil  and  labour)  in  the
pursuit of aims  foreign  to rural society.

2. 

SOME  CHARACTERISTICS  OF  THE  ORIGINAL  SCHEMES

Let us look more closely at these two schemes on the banks of the Nile and
Niger  rivers.  Their  aims  were  identical:  on  the  one  hand,  to  reduce  the
burden on the colonial power by generating income for the administration
and,  on  the  other,  to  strengthen  the  market  economy  by  supplying  raw

material  (cotton)  for  the  textile  industries.  In  both  schemes,  food  crops
were  envisaged  only  to  provide  subsistence  for  the  farmers.  In  Mali,  the
farmers  were  supposed  to  grow  rice,  although  their  staple  diet  was  millet
and sorghum.  Moreover, they could only cultivate within the scheme; rain-
fed  crops  were  prohibited.  In  Sudan,  rain-fed  agriculture was  impossible
because  of insufficient  rainfall.  Moreover,  the  extent  of the  schemes  and
their  contiguous  nature,  an  almost  unbroken  stretch  of  some  tens  of
thousands, and then hundreds of thousands of hectares, made it impossible
to associate irrigated  crops with rain-fed crops or animal husbandry.

The areas  under irrigation were contiguous as far as possible because this
reduced  investment  costs  per hectare,  the  main item  of expenditure being
the  construction  of dykes  and  canals.  The  expansion  of these  areas  was
designed  to  increase  production  and  thereby  the  revenues  of the  colonial
administration  and  the  delivery  of  raw  materials  to  the  metropolitan
industries.

The two schemes were managed by parastatal  agencies.  Before  1932,  the
Niger  River  Scheme  (known  as  the  Office  du  Niger)  was  managed  by  a
cotton-growing company and then by a public body belonging to the French
state.  Both had Boards of Directors; in the case of the Gezira scheme, the
'Sudan Gezira Board'.  Both agencies were the owners of the schemes and
were  judged  by  the  economic  and  financial  results  of  their  means  of
production, i.e. the irrigation network and the labour power of the farmers.
The  latter  were  not  allowed  to  own  the  land  they  cultivated.  They were
called  'tenants'  and bound  to the managing agencies by renewable annual
contracts,  although  they also  had  to work  for themselves.  Such  contracts
stipulated  that  the  tenants  must  obey  the  instructions  of  the  agency's
representatives  and  were  liable  to  non-renewal  of their  contracts  if they
disobeyed.

The conditions under which such schemes were established, as well as their
aims,  meant  that  the  managing  agencies  had  to  deal  not  only  with  the
irrigation  network,  but  also  the  management  of the  farms  within  it.  The
colonial  power  structure  gave  the  managing  agencies  sufficient  leeway  to
impose centralised management of the network.  They could therefore, with
the support where necessary of the colonial forces of law and order, ensure
that their production objectives prevailed against those of the tenants.

4

5

3.

CURRENT  PLANNING  AND  DESIGN  OF  HYDRO-
AGRICULTURAL SCHEMES

These first government attempts at hydro-agricultural development may be
likened  to the  establishment and management of factories.  The managing
agencies  resemble  the  management  and  board  of  directors  of  a  private
enterprise.  The  status  of  the  tenant  was  less  that  of  an  autonomous
smallfarmer  free  to  choose  his  land,  crops  and  methods  than  that  of  a
worker  obliged  to  produce  a  product  selected  by  management,  using
methods also selected by the latter.  The processed raw material - water -
was distributed to the machines - the plots of land - in accordance with the
theory  of  marginal  costs.  Economic  performance  was  barely,  if  at  all,
measured in terms of income generated by the tenants, but rather in terms
of the  profitability of the  investment.

This  'industrial'  approach  characterising  Western  irrigation  techniques  is
reflected  in  current  design  methods  such  as  the  principle  of selecting  the
crop  in  advance,  the  principle  of sharing water between  plots  rather  than
between  farmers,  the  stress  placed  on  economies  of  scale,  etc.  These
principles illustrate the fact that  decision-makers and investors are seeking
to introduce irrigation in the hope of meeting objectives not shared by the
local  society.  An  example  in Africa would  be  that  of planners wishing  to
reduce rice imports by stimulating in-country production.

As in the colonial era, irrigation engineers find themselves asked to design
a scheme which will mobilise the resources of a rural society to attain aims
pursued  by  elements  from  outside  that  society.  Pedologists  are  sent  to
choose  the  soil  and  agronomists  to select  the  varieties to  be  grown.  The
irrigation  engineer  is  sent  to  calculate  the  plants'  water  requirements  in
accordance  with  the  climate  and  the  permeability  of  the  soil.  He  then
establishes the interval between irrigations and peak water needs.  He orders
a topographical survey to determine the sites and dimensions of the canals.
All these engineers have to act as if the scheme belonged to a single owner.
They work without having to consult the smallfarmers, as their responsibility
is really to design a scheme against the single criterion of meeting the water
requirements of the plant to be cultivated.

In this approach,  the size of the  network, the area to be irrigated and the
choice of the crop and variety are closely linked.  This 'industrial' approach
also  implies that farmers  must  sow during the  period set by the  engineers
who design and manage the scheme and they must till, weed and harvest at

6

the  times  determined  by  the  latter.  The  scale  of  the  scheme  and  the
impossibility of supplying more water than peak-period requirements make
centralised  management inevitable.  This  in  its  turn  assumes the ability to
direct  and  coordinate  farming  activities,  i.e.  the  smallholders'  agricultural
work.  The  role  of individual  farmers  is  less  important  and  they  have  no
influence on the major decisions by which they will be bound.  Moreover,
the  management  of the scheme takes  no  account  of their other economic
and social activities.  It is quite common for managers of large schemes to
use coercion  to  direct smallfarmer behaviour.

The result is that the design of African schemes is dictated by the following
norms, which are very rarely made explicit:

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

the  users  must  be  100%  dependent  on  their  irrigated plots  for their
food and  cash  income;

the users must maximize the net production of their plots to offset the
initial investment;

the bulk of their production must be sold in order to comply with the
policy of such schemes and meet the costs they involve;

the management must sign the contract only with the person they see
as  head  of  household  and  not  with  other  people  involved  in
production, in particular a wife or wives;

the earlier division of labour between men and women, young and old,
is not relevant in the context of the scheme;

the  crop must be  chosen by the  investor;

means  of  production  must  only  be  allocated  to  the  head  of  the
household;

income from sales must be handed only to the head of the household;

the plots to be irrigated must be contiguous so as to obtain the most
favourable ratio between the area under irrigation and the length of
the canals;

• 

the soil must be  homogeneous;

7

• 

the irrigation turns must be designed to make the best possible use of
the water.

One may conclude  from  this  that  the fact  that  hydro-agricultural  planning
and design techniques are expressed in physical terms does not make them
neutral  parameters.  The  principle  of allocating water  to  plots  is  a  good
example  of what we  mean.  This  principle  ignores  the  fact  that  the  plots
belong to smallfarmers, and consequently ignores their mutual political and
organisational  relationships.  All  these  principles  reflect  the  way  planners
and  technicians  think  an  agricultural  scheme  should  be  managed  and  an
irrigated  plot should be worked.

This suggests that irrigation is a social as well as physical matter.  Let us now
look  at  the  insights  obtained  from  sociological  research  into  irrigation  in
Africa.

4. 

THE SOCIOLOGY OF IRRIGATION IN AFRICA

As far as irrigation is concerned, the social sciences have not hitherto been
greatly  interested  in  the  problems  and  techniques  of  hydro-agricultural
development.  They  have  tended  to  ask  questions  which  reflect  their
theoretical perspective.  These fall into two categories:

• 

• 

what effect do government irrigation projects have on rural societies?

how  do  African  farmers  manage  systems  they  have  built  and
maintained  for  themselves  and  to  what  purposes  do  they  put  their
plots?

The first type of research deals with the transformations effected within the
society. 
In  the  1970s,  several  sociological  surveys  considered  the
introduction  of  government  schemes.  Studies  on  Nigeria,  Gambia  and
Ghana, were conducted by Wallace (1979), Dey (1982), Adams and Grove
(1983),  Jackson  (1985),  and  Konings  (1986).  These  writers  studied
developments  in  the  agricultural  landholding  system; 
the  influx  of
landowners  from  outside  local  society;  the  advent  of  new  working
relationships;  smallholders'  relationships  with  input  suppliers  and  crop
purchasers,  public  authorities,  politicians,  officials  and  irrigation  service
technicians;  and  their  relationships  with  other  immigrants.  The  authors
approached  these  subjects  from  a  theoretical  perspective.  For  their

purposes, irrigated agriculture was the context within which they tested an
anthropological  or sociological theory.

Documentation dealing with endogenous irrigated agriculture tends to be of
an ethnographic nature.  There are also communities in Africa which have
been  practising  irrigation  since well  before  colonial  times.  Some  systems
have been described by sociologists, amongst them those of the Sonjo people
in Tanzania (Gray 1963; Potkanski 1988), the Taita in Kenya (Fleuret 1985),
the Ewe in Ghana (Grove et al, 1982; Chisholm, 1984), the Baga in Guinea-
Conakry (Paulme, 1957), the Diola in Senegal (Linares, 1981; van der Klei,
1989) and the Mandinka (Haswell, 1963; Weil, 1973).

These  researchers  particularly studied  the  irrigation  infrastructure  and  the
political  relationships  within  which  these  rural  peoples  managed  their
schemes.  An  analysis  of  this  literature  shows  that  management  of  the
infrastructure was part of the local political system.  Fleuret considered that
management of the irrigation network was part of the daily political process
for  the  Taita.  Gray  and  Potkanski  demonstrated  that  the  key  to  the
distribution of irrigation water was the balance of power between the three
classes of free men recognised by the Sonjo.  In a study of the legal system
of the Chagga, Moore observed that this society comprises four autonomous
entities: the market, the district, the lineage and ... the irrigation committee.
The  work  of van  der  Klei  and  Linares  established  that  the  Diola  do  not
recognise any chiefs  at village level  or in  terms of managing their polders.
Grove et al were more interested in relationships with the market.  Fleuret,
Gray and Moore stressed the integration of plots under irrigation within the
system of resource use including dry farming and animal husbandry.  Fleuret
showed that the Taita use their hydraulic infrastructure to produce not only
for subsistence purposes, but also for the market, like the Chagga who have
become  famous  for  their  coffee.

These academic studies were backed up by work on what we might call the
sociology  of  organisation. 
In  this  approach,  researchers  define  their
objective  as  developing  more  effective  ways  of organising  the  design  and
management  problem.  They  study  the  development  and  operation  of an
irrigation  project  as  a  management  problem.  This  approach  originated  in
the USA during the 1970s, as a result of research commissioned by donors
such as the World Bank, USAID, and the Ford Foundation.

8

9

These donors had become alarmed by the combination of high installation
and operating costs with disappointing yields in South Asia, something which
is also found in sub-Saharan Africa.  Their concern was heightened by the
fact that the yield of the new varieties of rice, developed with their financial
assistance,  depended  on  carefully  measured  amounts  of  water  being
delivered  at  the  right  moment.  The  research  to  be  conducted  by  the
sociologists  dealt  with  relationships  between  farmers  using  irrigation,
between the latter and the technicians and between the technicians.  They
were intended to design organisational principles enabling the new varieties
of rice to receive an adequate supply of water.

Sociological research conducted within this framework takes the scheme and
the irrigation service as the macrocosm.  The picture which emerges is that
of physical infrastructure (canals, plots, etc) constituting the 'hardware', and
social relationships the 'software'.  The sociologists' job is to put together a
programme which will enable the engineers"hardware' to function (better).
This approach does not call into question the assumptions which underpin
the criteria used by planners and designers.  It forms the core of papers in
the book edited by Coward  (1980), although he has been a key proponent
of  better  understanding  of  local  institutions.  Research  based  on  this
perspective has so  far been conducted primarily in South-East Asia.

What  insights  can be gained  from  these  three viewpoints  to  overcome  the
crisis  in  the  development  of  irrigation  systems?  The  'transformation'
approach  shows  that  the  crisis  is  political  and  social  as  well  as  economic.
The old power relations between  farmers have been replaced by new ones
which  are  sometimes  more  unequal.  The  division  of labour between  men
and women,  old  and young  men,  almost  ceases  to  be  relevant  within  the
schemes.  Smallfarmers are often no more than mere tenants of people who
live in towns.  Researchers have shown that engineers restructure not only
the landscape but rural society as well.  In doing this, they meet not only the
resistance of the land and the force of the water, but also the resistance of
the production system and the  force of the local  political  system.

The  'ethnographic' approach shows that the  crisis in  irrigation is confined
to  exogenous  development. 
It  provides  the  information  enabling  a
comparison to be made between 'industrial' and indigenous schemes, even
though  the  researchers  do  not  themselves  make  such  a  comparison. 
It
shows  that  amongst  the  Taita  and  other  African  peoples,  planning  and
management  of hydro-agricultural  infrastructure  are  linked  to  the  political
system and that the  use of the plots  fits within the  existing production

system. 
management are also imbued with political and economic norms.

It  implicitly  reminds  us  that  Western  methods  of  design  and

Finally,  the  'organisational'  approach  originates  from  quite  a  different
context  than  that  of Africa.  In  South  Asia,  canals  stretch  over  tens  and
sometimes  hundreds  of  kilometres,  irrigating  hundreds  of  thousands  of
hectares.  Managing  such  networks  presents  quite  different  problems  to
those  encountered  in  sub-Saharan  Africa,  where  few schemes  cover more
than ten  thousand hectares.  Still more  importantly,  in Asian systems, the
farmers  still  control  their  own  land.  Farmers  retain  at  least  a  degree  of
choice as to the crop they grow and their land is not confiscated, except for
construction  purposes.  In  Africa,  on  the  contrary,  farmers  do  not  retain
control of their land but are dispossessed.  Along with  their land, they lose
all freedom to choose their crop.  The management does its best to destroy
their farming system and their internal organisation in respect of production
and  consumption,  and  does  not  consider  existing  gender  relations. 
In
stressing management  of the network,  the  organisational approach fails  to
take account of the fact of there being little economic interest in irrigated
agriculture  for  smallfarmers.

None of the three approaches identifies planning and design methods which
would help to rescue official irrigation schemes from the present deadlock.
So  let  us  now,  armed  with  our  knowledge  of the  'industrial'  vision  which
inspires current methods of hydro-agricultural planning and design, and of
the  sociology  of  irrigated  production  in  Africa,  look  at  the  factors
responsible for the recent success of village irrigation schemes in the Senegal
River Valley.

5. 

THE RELATIVE SUCCESS OF VILLAGE IRRIGATION SCHEMES
ALONG THE SENEGAL RIVER

The number of village schemes had risen  from zero in  1970 to over 700 in
1988, covering a total  of 14,467 hectares  (OMVS,  1988).  What are these
schemes  like  and what  factors have led to their rapid  spread?

A village scheme often covers about 20 hectares.  It is managed by all the
owners of the  plots who were known as producers' groups until  1988, but
which are now changing into 'economic interest groups' following a new law
offering tax  advantages.  These groups  generally  have between  40  and 80
members, equivalent to the number of plots in the scheme.  The members

10

11

own their plots.  Plots within a scheme are about the same size, although the
average size may vary from 0.2 to 0.8 hectares.  In most cases, the owners
live  in  the  same  village.  The  schemes  are  located  close  to  a  river  or
floodplain channel, usually less than 100 metres away.  A motor-pump lifts
up  the  water  and  pumps  it  back  through  pipes  into  the  dispersal  basin
located on the levees.  A basic network of open channels, regulated by an
average of ten sluice-gates, carries the water to the plots.

The  smallfarmers  and  a  national  agency4  share  the  construction  of village
schemes.  When  the  village  lands  include  areas  close  to  the  river  or  a
stream, the group suggests the site to the agency which  makes a technical
assessment.  Should the group's village not have any land close to a water
source, it may negotiate with a neighbouring village to make land available
in  accordance  with  the  laws  governing  national  resources  and  rural
communities.  Should  the  technical  assessment  be  favourable,  the  agency
sends a topographical team and the villagers clear the land, which is often
wooded.

On the basis of a plan worked out by the technicians from the agency, small-
holders belonging to  the  new group dig the channels  and  shape the  plots.
They are helped in this to varying degrees by the earth-moving equipment
of the agency.  The sluice-gates/weirs are constructed by skilled masons paid
by the agency.  Once the scheme has been built, the peasants draw lots for
the plots.

This extraordinary way of allocating land was introduced by the teams from
the agency who set up the  first schemes.  These were  initially designed to
save  the  people  from  famine.  In  view  of this,  both  the  agency  and  the
villagers were agreed  that anyone who wanted  one should  be allocated an
irrigated plot.  This  procedure corresponded  to the  desire  of the  teams  to
break the domination of the 'free', land-holding clans over the descendants
of slaves.  It was made easier by the fact that the newly-irrigated lands were
not  very  significant  within  the  farming  systems  at  the  time.  It  should  be
noted, furthermore, that this procedure of allocating by lot is still practised.
However, it is now more common for the representative of the clan holding
the land before the scheme was set up to receive additional plots.

The  next  phase  is  to  manage  the  scheme  and  bring  the  plots  into
production. 
The  smallholders  see  it  as  natural  and  obvious  that
management  of  the  scheme  should  be  modelled  on  the  organisational
relationships  to  which  they  are  accustomed  in  other  fields.  Haalpulaar
villages,  for  example,  have  many  associations,  amongst  them  the  'youth
association' for young people from the village.  These associations seek to
maintain the village, arrange construction or repair of wells, renovate market
places,  pay  for  the  training  of  a  village  midwife  or  construction  of
classrooms, etc.  They may also organise wrestling contests or other activities
to  make village  life more agreeable.  The  associations  sometimes  manage
substantial amounts of money,  especially if their funds are topped up with
remittances  from  migrant  workers  in  France  or  other  African  countries.
Associations also have  procedures  for monitoring cashflow.

The  organisational  model  which  underpins  associations  is  learned  in  the
'age-sets'.  Formerly,  an  institution  for  the  initiation  of boys,  the  age-set
system has retained its function of socialisation.  When children are between
8  and  12  years  of  age,  their  parents  organise  one  age-set  for  boys  and
another  for  girls.  Membership  is  for  life.  The  children  must  elect  a
president,  treasurer and  so  on.  They may decide  to  pay dues  in order to
purchase sweetmeats, drinks, etc.  In these age-sets, children learn to act as
members  of a  group,  take  collective decisions  and  stick  to them  (or make
sure  others stick  to them).  Some children,  particularly those belonging to
dominant  lineages,  learn  to  dominate  their  peers,  while  the  others,  for
instance the children of slave descendants, learn to obey.  In the words of
a Haalpulaar:  "the fedde (vernacular for age-set) are our schools".

of 

there 

the  Haalpulaar, 

It is just as natural to replicate political divisions within the scheme.  In the
case 
classes,
neighbourhoods/villages  and  political  factions.  The  Haalpulaar  divide
themselves into free men, artisans and slave descendants.  Until about 1980,
village policy-making was the  exclusive preserve  of certain  lineages  of free
men, with both artisans and slave descendants excluded.  When it comes to
selecting presidents or secretaries for irrigation groups, one generally  finds
free men  rather than  artisans  or slave-descendants.

are 

three 

social 

As a result of legislation, universal suffrage and migration, the gap between
slave  descendants  and  free  men  has  shrunk  to  such  an  extent  that,  when
irrigation schemes were established, descendants of slaves could join groups
and  own  plots.  The  village  now  represents  the  local  political  unit.
Inhabitants  tend  to  see  themselves  as  part  of a  particular village.  When

13

villages have to manage a scheme together, they also tend to do this, i.e. to
see  the  others  as  belonging  to  a  different  political  system,  with  all  its
implications  in  terms of dependency and  loyalty.  When  there is  an  equal
number of members from two different villages, management is deadlocked,
because  there  are  no  institutions  at  inter-village  level  to  resolve  disputes.
When  members  live  in  a  single  village,  i.e.  belong  to  the  same  political
system,  disputes  are generally settled  in the context of shared  dependency
and loyalty.

This indicates that valley dwellers have copied the organisational model of
their age-sets in managing their new infrastructure in the form of the hydro-
agricultural scheme.  Members' access to prestigious and leadership posts,
the  distribution  of  plots  and  the  settlement  of  other  issues  do  of  course
reflect  the  divisions  found  in  the  village  political  arena.  The  success  of
village  irrigation  schemes  is  partly  due  to  the  match  between  the  local
political system and the infrastructure, as well as the fact that valley dwellers
were free to organise the management of their schemes  along the lines of
a model with which they were all  familiar.

Getting  back  to  the  insights  gained  from  an  analysis  of the  ethnographic
research, it is clear that management of village schemes resembles the way
the Taita and others manage their hydro-agricultural infrastructure  in that
it is an integral part of the local political system.

The  fact  that  the  valley  dwellers  were  willing  to  organise  themselves  to
construct and manage the schemes indicates that the use of irrigation fitted
within their production objectives.  During the 1960s and 1970s, production
and  consumption  amongst  the  Haalpulaar was  organised  at  household  or
foyre level.  The foyre  comprised the  husband and his wife or wives, their
children  and  sometimes  some  married  children,  the  father  or  mother of a
spouse, and/or another relative.  The average was around six people.

Within the foyre, the man was responsible for tilling the soil and weeding the
millet and sorghum crops.  (These were generally grown in association with
cow-peas.)  He was assisted by his wife only in bird-scaring, harvesting and
transportation.  The woman  would  grow  cherry  tomatoes,  sweet  potatoes
and other vegetables in riverside fields, if she had inherited any.  During the
1960s  fewer  and  fewer  men  were  available  to  grow  cereals.  Before  that
time,  they  used  to  migrate  to  the  groundnut-growing  region  or  major
Senegalese towns, returning for the rainy season.  As the French economy
expanded during the 1960s, they began to migrate to Europe, whence they

could not return for the rainy season. By the 1980s, practically every foyre
had  at least  one  man  who had been  away  for at  least  three  months  in the
last twelve.  The women stayed in the village, covering the cereal deficit by
buying  millet  and  sorghum  in  the  village  with  the  remittances  from  their
husbands  (Diemer and van der Laan,  1987).

Drought  added  to  the  problems  caused  by  migration.  Average  annual
rainfall  dropped  by 25%, placing the valley within  the  150-600 mm  range
where before it had fallen within the 250-800 mm range  (Van Driel,  1988).
Rainfed  crops  failed,  while  the  traditional  fall-back  of  flood-recession
agriculture was available to only a few valley dwellers.

TABLE 1: Division of Tasks Related to Date of Establishment of Schemes

Number of Seasons  (since establishment)
1-2 

>  4

Men
Women
Children

All

58%
21%
21%

100%

49%
32%
19%

100%

Source: 

OMVS  (1980)

Village irrigation schemes were conceived in the light of these changes. The
local people used them to bridge the cereal gap caused by the combination
of drought and male out-migration.  Households also adjusted their division
of  labour  to  the  realities  of  migration.  The  socio-economic  survey
conducted  by  the  OMVS  (1980)  indicated  that  women's  participation  in
farming increased  the longer schemes had been established.

During the  1980s, local people introduced several changes to this irrigated
subsistence  agriculture.  Let us  take the women  first.  Even  in the  1950s,
about  two-thirds  of valley  dwellers  had  no  access  to the  riverside  gardens

14

15

where  the  women  grow  sweet  potatoes,  okra,  cherry  tomatoes,  etc,
(Boutillier,  1982).  These  gardens  provided  a  small  cash  income  for  the
women, as well as ingredients for the sauces to go with meals.  As irrigated
rice-growing was added to flood-recession cropping, irrigated gardening was
added to existing riverside gardening.  Women's associations in nearly every
village now have an irrigated  orchard, usually located near the village and
served by a well.

Another change was the decrease in the intensity of cropping in rice-growing
schemes.  In  the hope of increasing the proportion of rice sent to market,
the  national  development  agencies  increased  the  size  of  plots  over  the
decade.  The average of about 0.2 hectares around 1980, had risen to about
0.3  hectares  by  1989.  The  agencies  assumed  that  the  farmers,  many  of
whom practised double cropping, would continue to do so, but the farmers
decided otherwise.  They took advantage of the increased size of their plots
to grown all the rice they needed in one season.  This meant that they did
not have to cultivate during the dry season when pumping costs are greater
because of the higher rate of evapotranspiration and the need to pump from
a greater depth (Jamin, 1987; Bastiaansen, 1988; Diemer,  1990).

Irrigated rice-growing has become an integral part of the production system.
The good rains which fell in the Sahel in recent years did not lead farmers
in the mid-Senegal valley to abandon their schemes.  On the contrary, the
commitment to irrigation increased, with people trying to reserve fields close
to the river for their children.

Very few groups have had to stop irrigating because they could not replace
their  worn-out  pumping  equipment.  One  reason  for  this  is  that  SAED
(Land-Use and Development Company of the Senegal and Faleme Delta)
and  SONADER  (National  Rural  Development  Agency),  after  some
hesitation,  made  provision  for  depreciation  costs. 
In  the  case  of
SONADER, a strict depreciation rate is applied which enables the motor to
be  replaced  in  five  years.  In  the  case  of SAED,  a  more  flexible  rate  is
combined with less strict application, which means that many groups needing
to replace their motor have only 80% of the necessary funds available. They
get  round  this  by  allowing  a  local  businessman/politician  to  supply  the
missing amount or by getting a foreign NGO interested in their plight.  Even
more  frequently,  the  group  whose  motor-pump  has  broken  down  puts
pressure on SAED to lend them a pump until the end of the season.  This
leads to almost interminable  negotiations as a result of which the group

often  succeeds  in  getting  a  considerable  grant  towards  their  new  motor-
pump.

To  sum  up,  it  is  clear  that  the  success  of  village  schemes  lies  in  their
adaption  to the  local production system  and,  more  specifically,  to  changes
within it.  In addition, the Haalpulaar were free to organise the management
of their  schemes  according  to  their  own  organisational  model  and  fit  this
into their political system.  This is contrary to the industrial approach which
is  characterised by rejection of the production  and  political systems  of the
smallfarmers/tenants, 
imposition  of  particular
organisational relationships.  The importance of the production system may
also  be  deduced  from  the  rapid  spread  of  irrigated  gardens  and  the
decreased intensity of cropping practised by  farmers  over the  decade.

together  with 

the 

6. 

POINTERS  FOR  MORE  EFFECTIVE  PLANNING  AND  DESIGN
METHODS

How  does  identifying  the  reasons  for  the  success  of  village  irrigation
schemes  help  us  to  develop  more  effective  planning  and  design  methods?
We think this shows that planners and designers must devote more attention
to the smallfarmers' production system and local political system.  Study of
the  former  should  pinpoint  the  organisational  criteria  for  designing  the
hydraulic  network,  while  study  of the  latter should  be  undertaken  with  a
view to identifying the criteria  for allocating plots.

Let  us  first  look  at management of the infrastructure.  As  the impetus  for
the spread of village schemes came from the valley dwellers themselves, they
organised in the same way to present their requests as they intended to do
in  managing  their  scheme.  The  point  is  that  they  found  it  natural  and
obvious to organise themselves on  the basis of their belonging to a village.
Although  this  was  not  made  explicit,  their  planning  and  design  practices
were based on the relevant organisational unit and political affiliation.  Their
approach  thus  almost  automatically  matched  the  scheme  with  the  local
political system.

This is the opposite to current procedures.  Comparison with developments
in  the  Senegal  river  delta  makes  this  quite  clear.  In  the  1970s,  schemes
covering  a  thousand to  two  thousand  hectares were designed.  They were
supposed to be managed by cooperatives including residents from different
villages.  The  very  fact  that  the  president  of the  cooperative  belonged  to

16

17

another village  led  a good  number of members belonging to  other villages
to mistrust him with regard to vital activities like payment of dues and selling
the harvest (Waldstein,  1986).  This mistrust was not unfounded inasmuch
as the mutual dependency and loyalty which linked these dignitaries to the
inhabitants of their own villages were stronger than their links with members
of that  new,  foreign  and  more  or less  politicised  and  state  institution:  the
cooperative.

The chosen management unit in villages was viable because it resulted from
proposals  made  by  the  farmers  themselves.  During  the  sixty or  so years
which elapsed before village schemes began to spread in the valley, both the
colonial  and  post-independence  governments  always  avoided  the  mid-
Senegal valley.  This was in spite of the fact that the technical services often
pointed  out  its  physical  hydro-agricultural  potential.  However,  the  plans
submitted by the engineers did  not fit in with local political realities.  The
'controlled  flooding'  system,  for  instance,  was  designed  for  seasonally
inundated  depressions.

The land tenure arrangements in these depressions generally involve lineages
of  farmers  along  with  lineages  of  fishermen  and  herders  (Schmitz,  1987).
Yet, these fishermen and herders found themselves forced out of their lands
by  these  purely  agricultural  schemes.  Moreover,  these  areas  are  often
farmed by several lineages from different villages.  Successive administrations
were  therefore  afraid  of  encountering  political  resistance  they  would  be
unable  to  overcome  (OMVS,  1980;  Boutillier  et  al,  1962).  This  lack  of
suitable approaches led them to concentrate their investments in the delta.
However, the success of village irrigation schemes suggests that viable ways
of  irrigating  land  in  the  valley  could  be  developed  so  long  as  the  local
political system is considered not just as a constraint, but also as a potential
management  tool.

The  Haalpulaar smallfarmers were  able  to  impose  their  own  management
model.  This is not due to the planning and design methods adopted by the
rural engineering service, but rather to the fact that the government did not
dare  to  impose  its  own  management  model  on  the  smallfarmers.  This
historical accident shows us that the design of the hydraulic network should
be based on the definition of the management unit.  Feasibility and detailed
pre-project studies should identify the most appropriate unit on the basis of
field surveys  and  discussions with the smallfarmers.

The  example  of  village-schemes  indicates  that  the  local  political  system
should  be  viewed  not  only  from  the  angle  of what  it  precludes,  i.e.  as  a
constraint, but also from the angle of what it allows, i.e. as an opportunity.
This  same  reasoning  may  be  applied  to  the  production  system.  The
proposals for developing the hydro-agricultural potential of the valley made
by the engineers implied profound changes in the political system as well as
in the local people's production system.  They were designed to realise the
potential  of the annually flooded depressions where the  people grew their
staple  food  -  sorghum.  The  engineers were keen  on these areas not  only
because of their clayey soil,  suited to irrigated rice,  but also because they
thought they could channel water by gravity without pumping (for instance,
by installing coffer-dams to control  flooding,  as mentioned above).

The  schemes  introduced  a  new  risk  in  the  sense  that  a  tried  and  tested
technique was  being replaced by one which  had yet  to  be adapted  to  the
social and physical environment.  The irrigation system which  invaded the
valley and is now predominant does not use the depressions.  It is practised
instead  on  the  uplands  situated  either  on  the  levees  or  half-way between
these levees and the depressions.  These lands were of only marginal in the
production  system,  since  they  were  rarely  flooded.  Bringing  these  lands
under cultivation did not add a risk but created  an  additional resource.  It
strengthened  a  production  system  based  on  minimising  risks,  unlike  the
'industrial' approach which generally expects that the tenants should depend
100% on their irrigated plots for their livelihood (see Richards,  1986).

Furthermore,  the  system  which  has  swept  all  before  it  obtains  water  by
pumping  rather  than  gravity.  As  migration  expanded  rapidly  during  the
1960s  and  70s,  the  market  economy  penetrated  ever  deeper  into  the
smallfarmer  production  system.  Demographic  growth,  drought  and  the
stagnation  of farming techniques were  all  factors  pushing towards  the  use
of resources outside the valley.  Migration offered a way of minimising risks
in  this  context  of unfavourable  changes.  Moreover,  it  generated  income.
This  income  made possible  the  intensification  of agriculture  demanded by
the combination  of drought and more mouths  to  feed.  While  maintaining
their  production  objectives,  i.e.  subsistence,  the  Haalpulaar  introduced
pumping into their production system (with financial support from migrants),
once  again  contrary  to  the  'industrial'  approach  in  which  the  cost  of
pumping is to be covered by agricultural sales.

We should also point out that households took advantage of new subsistence
cropping  to  replace  a  division  of labour which  had  become  obsolete  with

18

19

long-term migration.  In the mid-Senegal valley, women began to undertake
almost  all  farming  operations.  This  again  shows  the  gap  between  the
industrial  approach  and  smallholder  practices.  Many  engineering  reports
mentioned  migration,  but  it  was  seen as  an  obstacle  to  hydro-agricultural
development because work on irrigated land was primarily seen as men's
work.  This  (male)  labour  seemed  to  be  lacking  as  a  result  of migration
(FAO, 1983).

In parallel, it is noticeable that women are organising themselves to set up
and manage market gardens which have their own pump or well and are not
dependent on the irrigation scheme's motorpump.  Women have organised
themselves in virtually all villages to set up these gardens, as if replicating in
the  context  of irrigated  agriculture  the  kitchen  gardens  of yesteryear.  As
before, they sell about 25% of their produce and use the rest for preparing
meals (Helsloot, 1988).

The  particular  features  of this  irrigated  subsistence  farming  show that one
cannot merely describe the production system.  It is necessary also - perhaps
especially - to analyse the system with the smallholders.  By so doing, one
may  hope  to  identify  inter-action  between  the  components  of the  system
which the scientific literature would not lead us to expect, and which opens
up  new  avenues.  Migration  created  new  opportunities  which  the
smallfarmers  were  the  first  to  recognise.  The  later  evolution  of  village
schemes shows the need for such joint analysis.

The rapid  spread of village schemes gives glimpses of several processes of
change within the production system.  As with the local political system, this
must  not  be  considered  static.  These  changes  did  not  stop  when  village
schemes had become widespread throughout the valley.  After the wave of
irrigated  cereal production,  almost all villages  established  irrigated  market
gardens.

CONCLUSIONS

Analysis  of  the  success  of village  schemes  shows  that  the  success  of  any
physical  infrastructure  is  dependent  on  its  conformity  with  smallfarmer
reality.  To  be  precise,  the  characteristics  of  the  plot  (soil,  surface  area,
distance from home, etc) must be matched with the smallholder production
system and the water distribution network must be matched with the mode
of political organisation.  The fact that the motor-pump is imported is

20

unimportant.  The main thing is that the farmers should be able to use it for
their own purposes5.

This  conclusion  goes  beyond  the  literature  taking  the  'transformation'
approach.  While  this  approach  notes  the  gap  between  the  schemes  and
smallfarmer society is noted, it is not identified as the cause of failure.  The
pretentions to universal validity of this agricultural science are accepted and,
therefore, the 'transformation' approach seeks merely to make its impact on
smallfarmer  society less  painful.

Our conclusion goes beyond the ethnographic approach in the sense that it
transforms its main finding into a prescription for hydro-agricultural planning
in  Africa.

Planning and design of irrigation schemes in Africa are presently governed
by norms which could hinder the development of irrigation.  Norms relating
to the place of irrigated plots within the smallfarmer production system and
the  appropriate  form  of organisation  for  managing  the  hydraulic  network
originate  in  an  ethnocentric  approach  which  we  could  describe  as
'industrial'.  They should be replaced with  empirical norms.  The study of
hydro-agricultural schemes which are recognised as viable helps to build a
picture  of the  gap  between  the  'industrial'  and  'smallfarmer'  perspectives.
Current planning and design methods have hitherto started from the premise
that  the  industrial  approach  was  the  only  possible  way.  It was  therefore
deemed inevitable that the scheme should be imposed on smallholders (men
and women)  and that they should be obliged to  adapt themselves to  it.

Trained by educational institutes in the industrialised countries, or by their
sister institutions established  in African countries, these specialists in rural
engineering design act according  to  a vision  of irrigated  production  which
may be classified as industrial.  Like other agricultural sciences, methods of
hydro-agricultural  design  are  based  on  social  and  economic  premises
emanating  from  industrialised  society  which  are  not  valid  for  the  rural
societies  currently found in the African  countryside.

If viable schemes are to be set up, methods of planning and design must be
reversed.  If the scheme is to be a tool in the hands of smallfarmers, it must

5  Witness  the  2  hp  portable  pumps  which  irrigate  the  market  gardens  around
Sahelian towns, as well as individual farmers' fields on the plains of the Niger and
Benoufi  rivers  in Northern Nigeria  and  the  Mwea  plain  in  Kenya.

21

their training with smallfarmer practices.  We do not of course think that the
adoption of these recommendations will make the crisis in African irrigation
a  thing  of the  past.  We  also  consider  it  vital  that  irrigation  programmes
should  be  integrated  in  overall  national  development  policy,  stressing
research  into  appropriate  technology while  setting  up  a  guaranteed  price
policy to stimulate production and use of inputs and realistic terms of trade.

be designed in accordance with their production objectives  and models of
political organisation.  That is to say that planning and design must be based
on  norms  identified  through  study  of  the  local  production  and  political
systems.  This study must be  coupled with  discussion,  as both systems are
constantly changing.  They continually present the smallfarmers with choices
that someone from the outside is incapable of making.

This  is  a  challenge  for sociologists, who  should  be  studying  the  effects  of
village society on  the scheme,  at  the same  time as they look at the  latter
from  the  traditional  angle,  i.e.  the  effect  of  irrigation  in  relationships
between villagers.

RECOMMENDATIONS

Analysis  of the success of village  schemes  and  the ethnographic literature
suggests  that the  first  thing to  do  is  to  reverse  current  methods  of design
rather  than  vainly  seek  to  adapt  male  and  female  smallholders  to  the
designers'  assumptions. 
Smallfarmer  production  objectives  and
organisational relationships should be incorporated in design.  This will be
a tricky matter, as investments are made by the state and  its donors, who
have  their own objectives.  There  should  be  a  forum  on  irrigation,  where
smallfarmers and officials  can negotiate the scheme's production objectives
and  management  model.  This  should  enable  design  parameters  to  be
determined  which  faithfully  reflect 
the  balance  of  power  between
smallfarmers and state.  This will prevent the construction of schemes which
assume  a  higher  degree  of  state  control  over  the  smallfarmers  than  is
actually the case.

We therefore think that the terms of reference of consulting organisations
responsible  for  designing  schemes  or  assessing  their  feasibility  should
include:  a  detailed  description  of the  production  systems  of the  different
smallfarmer sectors, indicating to what extent male and female smallholders
consider  that  a  better  water  supply  would  lift  constraints;  a  detailed
description of their political culture and its implications for the layout of the
infrastructure  and  organisation  of  management;  detailed  reports  of
negotiations between smallfarmers and officials as to production objectives,
and lay-out  of the  network and management  model.

"We  also  think  that  trainee  rural  engineers  should  be  obliged  to  prepare
theses in which, on the basis of prolonged stays in the villages, they compare

22

23

REFERENCES

Adams, W.  M.  and A.T.  Grove,  eds.  (1983).  Irrigation in Tropical Africa,
problems and problem-solving.  Cambridge,  Royaume-Uni, African  Studies
Centre: 121-131.
Bastiaansen,  C.  (1988).  L'amenagement  et  l'exploitation  des  perimetres
irrigu6s villageois.  Wageningen:  rapport du projet de perimetres villageois,
32 pp. et 2 annexes.
Boutillier, J.L., et al. (1962). La moyenne vallee du Senegal. Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France.
Chambers, R. and J. Moris, eds. (1973). Mwea, an Irrigated Rice Settlement
in Kenya. Munich:  Weltforum Verlag.
Chisholm,  N.G.  (1984).  Indigenous  Irrigated  Production  in  S.E.  Ghana:
lessons for the design of small-holder irrigation schemes. Dans: MJ. Blackie,
ed.:  African  regional  symposium  on  small-holder  irrigation.  Harare,
Universite de Zimbabwe: 427-437.
Coward jr., W.E.,  ed.  (1980).  Irrigation  and  Agricultural  Development  in
Asia. Perspectives from the social sciences. Ithaca, N.Y., Cornell University
Press.
Dey,  J.  (1982).  Development  Planning  in  the  Gambia:  the  gap  between
planners'  and  farmers'  perceptions,  expectations  and  objectives.  World
Development 10,5: 377-396.
Diemer,  G.  et E.Ch.W.  van  der Laan  (1987) L'irrigation  au  Sahel.  Paris:
Karthala.
Diemer, G. (1990). Irrigatie in Afrika. (L 'irrigation en Afrique.) Amsterdam:
Thesis Publishers.
Driel, W. van (1988). Etude de faisabilite de la cuvette de Cascas. Rapport
principal, Universite Agronomique Wageningen, Pays-Bas.
FAO (1983). Rapport de la mission de preparation du projet d'irrigation de
Salde-Wala. No. 44/83 AF-SEN 12. Phase II. Rome, Centre d'investissement.
57 pp.  + annexes.
Fleuret,  P.  (1985). The Social  Organisation of Water  Control in  the Taita
Hills, Kenya. American Ethnologist 12,1: 103-119.
Gray, R.F. (1963). The Sonjo of Tanganyika, an Antropological Study of an
Irrigation Based Society.  London,  Oxford, University Press.
Grove, J.M., A.T. Grove, M. James and N.G. Chisholm (1982). Irrigation in
the  Volta  Delta,  Ghana.  In:  H.G.  Mensching,  ed.:  Problems  of  the
Management  of  Irrigated  Land  in  Areas  of  Traditional  and  Modern
Cultivation.  Report  of  an  inter-congress  meeting  of  the  International
Geographical Union. Hamburg: 24-37.

Haswell,  M.R.  (1963).  The  Changing  Pattern  of  Economic  Activity  in  a
Gambian Village.  London, Her Majesty's Stationery Office, Department of
Technical  Corporation,  Overseas Research Publication No.2,  109 pp.
Helsloot, L.  (1988). Vrouwen op het He a Morphil (Les femmes sur l'lle a
Morphil). Cascas, Senegal: rapport du projet perimetres villageois.  109 pp.
Jackson,  C.  (1985).  The  Kano  River  Irrigation  Project.  Kumarian  Press,
West  Hartford,  Etats-Unis.
Jamin,  J.-Y.  (1987)  La  double  culture  du  riz  dans  la  vallee  du  Senegal:
mythe  ou  realite?  Montpellier:  CIRAD,  Actes  du  troisieme  s6minaire  du
D6partement systemes agraires: Amenagements hydro-agricoles et systemes
de production, pp. 581-595.
Klei, J.M. van  der (1989). Trekarbeid bij  de Diola in Senegal.  (Migration
cyclique chez les Diola). These de doctorat. Universite Libre d'Amsterdam.
Konings,  P.  (1986).  The  State  and  Rural  Class  Formation  in  Ghana:  a
comparative analysis. Londres, Routledge et Kegan.
Linares,  O.F.  (1981).  From  Tidal  Swamp  to  Inland  Valley:  on  the  Social
Organization  of Wet Rice Cultivation  among the Diola  of Senegal. Africa
51, 2: 557-595.
OMVS  (1980).  Etude  socio-economique  du  bassin  du  fleuve  Senegal,
Dakar/Saint-Louis, 5 tomes.

OMVS (1988).  Bassin du fleuve Senegal:  perimetres irrigues amenages en
maitrise totale de l'eau. Notice explicative de la carte 8:  am6nagements.
Pauline, D. (1957). Des riziculteurs africains: Les Baga. Cahiers d'Outre-Mer,
10: 257-279.
Potkanski,  T.  (1988).  The  Sonjo  community  in  face  of  change.  Dans:
Hemispheres  4:191-222.
Richards P. (1986). Coping with hunger. Londres: Allen et Unwin.
Schmitz, J.  (1987).  Agriculture de  decrue,  unites  territoriales  et irrigation
dans  la  vallee  du  Senegal.  Montpellier:  actes  du  troisieme  seminaire  du
departement systemes agraires du CIRAD, pp.545-561.
Waldstein, A.S. (1986). Irrigated Agriculture as ah Archetypal Development
Project:  Senegal.  In:  M.M.  Horowitz  et T.M.  Painter,  eds.:  Anthropology
and  Rural  Development  in  West  Africa:  117-144.  Boulder  et  Londres,
Westview Press.
Wallace,  T.  (1979).  Rural  Development  through  Irrigation:  Studies  in  a
Town  on  the  Kano  River  Project.  Zaria,  Nigeria.  Centre  for  Social  and
Economic Research, Ahmadu Bello University, Paper no.3, 135 pp.
Weil, P.M. (1973). Wet Rice, Women and Adaptation in the Gambia. Rural
Africana, 19: 20-28.

24

25

Agricultural  Administration  Unit
Overseas Development Institute, London
The  Overseas  Development  Institute  (ODI)  is  an  independent,  non-profit
making research  institute.  Within it, the Agricultural Administration Unit
(AAU)  was  established  in  1975. 
Its  mandate  is  to  widen  the  state  of
knowledge  and  flow  of  information  concerning  the  administration  of
agriculture  in developing countries.  It does this  through a programme of
policy-orientated  research  and  dissemination.  Research  findings  and  the
results  of  practical  experience  are  exchanged  through  four  Networks  on
Agricultural  Research  and  Extension,  Irrigation  Management,  Pastoral
Development, and Social Forestry.  Membership is currently free of charge
to professional people active in the appropriate area, but members are asked
to provide their own publications in exchange, if possible.  This creates the
library which is central to information exchange.

Technical  Centre  for Agricultural and Rural Co-operation  (CTA)
The Technical Centre for Agricultural and Rural Co-operation  (CTA) was
established  in  1983  under  the  Lome  Convention  and  is  based  in  Ede-
Wageningen  in  the  Netherlands. 
Its  mandate  is  to  help  the  African,
Caribbean  and  Pacific  countries  which  comprise  the  ACP  group  achieve
greater food security by providing them with better access to scientific and
technical  information  on  all  issues  related  to  agricultural  and  rural
development.  Working in close cooperation with ACP and EEC countries
and  with  international,  regional  and  national  institutions,  CTA  fulfils  its
mandate  through  a  range  of  activities,  including  seminars,  studies,
publications and  support to  ACP documentation centres.

The  ODI  Irrigation  Management  Network is  sponsored  by The  Overseas
Development Administration (ODA), 94 Victoria Street, London SW 1E 5JL;
and The Ford Foundation, 320 E 43rd Street, New York, NY 10017, USA.

The  African  Edition  of Irrigation  Management Network
is  sponsored  by  the  ACP-EEC  Technical  Centre  for
Agricultural and Rural Co-operation (CTA), Postbus 380,
6700 AJ Wageningen, The Netherlands

© Overseas Development Institute, London, 1991. Photocopies of any part
of  this  publication  may  be  made  without  permission.  (Requests  for
commercial  reproduction  of  Network  material  should  be  directed  to  the
copyright  holders.)

