Chapter 12

Smallholder participation in value chains:
The case of domestic rice in Senegal*

Liesbeth COLEN1 Matty DEMONT2 and Johan SWINNEN1

* Correct citation: Colen, L., M. Demont, and J. Swinnen (2013), Smallholder participation in value chains: The
case of domestic rice in Senegal, In: Rebuilding West Africa’s Food Potential, A. Elbehri (ed.), FAO/IFAD.

1 LICOS – Centre for Institutions and Economic Performance and Department of Economics, University of Leuven (KUL) 
.
2 Africa Rice Center (AfricaRice) Saint-Louis, Senegal

Table of Contents 

1. 

Introduction

2.  Overview of consumption, production and trade 

2.1  Consumption
2.2  Production 
2.3  Import and export
2.4  National rice policies
2.5  Farmer organizations
2.6  Consumer preferences

 
3.  Supply chains of rice 

3.1  Import market chain
3.2  Domestic rice channel: Senegal River Valley
3.3  Domestic rice channel: southern Senegal

4.  Constraints to smallholder market participation

4.1  Conceptual framework
4.2  Constraints to market participation for Senegalese rice farmers
4.3  Constraints on access to local and urban markets

5. 

Implications, policy recommendations and perspectives
5.1  Focus on demand and private sector involvement
5.2  Quality upgrading
5.3  Vertical linkages
5.4  Reducing transaction costs
5.5  Promotion of domestic rice
5.6  Increasing productivity in southern rain-fed rice production areas

6.  Annex: Description of the survey and interviews organized in  
 

the Senegal River Delta in 2006

7.  References

393

393
393
394
395 
395
396
397

397
398
398
399

399
399
401
404

407
407
408
409
410
411
411

412

413

393

1. Introduction

Since 1985, rice production in West Africa has doubled, but consumption of rice has increased even more 
rapidly. This has resulted in the increasing dependence of West African countries on rice imports (Seck et al., 
2010). Rice is the most consumed cereal in Senegal (about 1.1 million tonnes in 2009). However, only 45 
percent of consumption is covered by domestic production; the rest is imported from India, Thailand, and Viet 
Nam (FAO, 2011). This large import dependency makes Senegal vulnerable to volatility in the international 
rice market (Seck et al., 2010). In response to the 2008 food crisis, the government in Senegal has placed rice 
on higher priority for self-sufficiency and increased investments to boost production. However, to successfully 
achieve self-sufficiency, Senegal will not only have to invest in productivity (supply push), but will need to 
tackle the demand side as well (demand pull). One of the major challenges will consist of linking smallholder 
farmers to large urban consumption markets by: (i) increasing marketable surplus; (ii) consolidating supply; 
and (iii) adapting quality of rice to conform to urban consumer standards (Demont and Rizzotto, 2012).

In this chapter we analyse current and potential participation of smallholders in rice value chains in 
Senegal.  We  formulate  policy  recommendations  to  reduce  the  constraints  for  smallholder  market 
participation, especially with respect to integration in the rapidly growing urban markets.

2. Overview of consumption, production and trade

Before  starting  a  more  detailed  analysis  of  the  value  chain  of  rice,  we  give  a  short  overview  of  the 
production and consumption patterns, the imports and the national policies in the Senegalese rice sector.

2.1 Consumption

Since the 1980s, rice consumption has surpassed the consumption of more traditional crops such as 
sorghum and millet and has become the main staple food consumed in Senegal (Table 1). In 2005 the 
consumption of rice was 68.5 kg per capita, compared to 42.3 kg in 1975.2 More than 30 percent of 
the daily calorie intake in Senegal currently comes from rice.

Table 1. Consumption of cereals and share of total calorie intake in Senegal in 1975, 1990 and 2005

1975
kg/cap/yr
89.3
42.3
23.6
18.5
10.3
 
2,109

% of kcal
28.4
19.7
8.9
6.4
4
 

1990
kg/cap/yr
58.3
62.1
17.2
25.5
15.9
 
2,135

% of kcal
18.4
28.5
6.4
8.7
6.1
 

2005
kg/cap/yr
21
68.5
10.2
29
33.8

2,199

% of kcal
6.4
30.8
3.7
9.6
12.6

 

Millet
Rice
Sorghum
Wheat
Maize
 
Total kcal/cap/day

Source:  FAOSTAT (2010)

2 By 2013, these consumption rates have reached 86.6 kg per capita.

Chapter 12. Smallholder participation in value chains: The case of rice in Sénégal394

This shift towards rice consumption began with the large and cheap imports of broken rice from the French 
colonies in Asia during the period of the French administration. The low processing and cooking costs of 
rice and the popularity of street-vendor sales of rice dishes enhanced the preference for rice in urban 
areas (Reardon, 1993). However, the shift to rice and especially the preference for broken rice—which is 
considered an inferior product on the international market—is much more pronounced in urban than in 
rural areas. As population growth is especially strong in urban areas, it is clear that urban consumption 
patterns have had and will continue to have an important impact on national demand and trade.

Today,  Senegalese  rice  consumption  still  largely  exceeds  domestic  production,  but  important  shifts 
are taking place (Figure 1). Up to 2007, rice demand and imports had been increasing because of 
population growth, increasing incomes, urbanization and the increasing share of rice in the Senegalese 
diet. However, since the 2008 food crisis, domestic production is progressively overtaking rice imports.

Figure 1. Consumption, production and trade of rice in Senegal, 2000–2009

1,400

1,200

1,000

s
e
n
n
o
t
 

d
n
a
s
u
o
h
T

800

600

400

200

0

0
0
0
2

1
0
0
2

2
0
0
2

3
0
0
2

4
0
0
2

5
0
0
2

Consumption

Production

6
0
0
2

Import

7
0
0
2

8
0
0
2

Export

9
0
0
2

Source: FAOSTAT (2011) and ANSD (2006–2009)
Note: Consumption is calculated as production plus imports, minus exports.

2.2 Production

During the food crisis in 2008, import prices of rice increased sharply. This led to high domestic prices for 
local rice and promoted important area expansion and increased double cropping.1 Together with good 
weather conditions, these resulted in a boost to domestic production in 2008. Rice is produced almost 
exclusively  by  smallholder  farmers.  Senegal’s  rice  production  consists  of  two  major  rice  production 
systems in two different ecosystems and yields vary significantly between these systems (Rodenburg 
and Demont, 2009).

First—and  most  important  in  terms  of  commercial  rice—are  the  irrigated  production  systems  which 
are situated primarily in the Senegal River Valley (SRV) in the regions of Saint-Louis, Podor and Matam 
(Figure 2). Seventy percent of national rice production is irrigated rice and yields reach an average of 
5 to 6 tonnes/ha. Several public investment schemes have contributed to the development of large-
scale irrigation schemes (GA – grands aménagements) and village irrigation schemes (PIV – périmètres 

1 Double cropping refers to the production of rice both in the rainy and in the dry season, resulting in two harvests per year. 

Rebuilding West Africa’s food potential395

irrigués villageois). In addition, after the disengagement of the government from the rice industry, private 
investors built private irrigation schemes (PIP – périmètres irrigués privés) in the Senegal River Valley.

Second, rain-fed lowland (bas-fond) rice cultivation is concentrated in the southern region of Casamance, 
and in the central and eastern regions of Fatick and Kaolack which together form the largest areas of rice 
cultivation. Rain-fed production contributes around 30 percent of national rice production and is based 
on very small plots (less than 0.1 ha). Average yields, at 1 to 2 tonnes/ha, are much lower than in the SRV.

Figure 2. Rice area harvested by region

Senegal River Valley

Rain-fed lowlands

Source: USAID (2009), based on harvest data from Centre Régional Agrhymet, 2000.

 

2.3 Import and export

Thailand used to be the main provider of rice to Senegal with some 42 percent share in 2010. Since 
then, Thailand’s share has fallen to 11.5% in 2012. Brazil, India,Pakistan and Viet Nam account for 
smaller imports of rice. More than 95 percent of Senegalese imports are of broken rice. With 22 percent 
of the world market, Senegal is the largest market for broken rice worldwide (USAID, 2009).

Rice exports from Senegal are small; they mainly consist of the re-export of imported rice to neighbouring 
countries. In addition, there is some unreported export of rice to neighbouring countries, mainly along 
the border with Mauritania. The Senegalese government estimates that volumes of informal rice exports 
correspond to 20–30 percent of official exports (USAID, 2009).

2.4 National rice policies

In 1994, after a period of heavy state involvement, Senegal started to liberalize its rice sector as part of its 
Structural Adjustment Program. The state disengaged from processing and marketing activities in 1994. 
In 1995 the state discontinued setting support prices for paddy 3 rice. The parastatal agency, SAED (Société 

3 ‘Paddy rice’ (sometimes called rough rice) is the term used for rice that is obtained by threshing after harvest, but 
still contains the husk surrounding the rice grain. Through the milling process, the husk is removed and the ‘paddy’ 
is converted into ‘milled rice.’

Chapter 12. Smallholder participation in value chains: The case of rice in Sénégal396

d’Aménagement et d’Exploitation des terres du Delta et des vallées du fleuve Sénégal et de la Falémé), 
which was responsible for management and commercialization of SRV rice in the pre-reform period, was 
converted during the mid-1990s into an independent organization responsible for technical assistance and 
the maintenance of irrigation infrastructure. 

In 2000, the Senegalese government adopted a new vision for the development of agriculture, including 
the  Strategy  of  Accelerated  Growth  (SCA  -  Stratégie  de  Croissance  Accélérée)  which  aims  to  reduce 
poverty by 50 percent by 2015 and achieve the Millennium Development Goals. In 2005 the Senegalese 
president set a target of 1.5 million tonnes of paddy rice (equivalent to 1 million tonnes of white rice) 
produced by 2015 in order to reach self-sufficiency (PNAR –Programme National d’Autosuffisance en Riz).

In April 2008, the president launched the GOANA program (Grande Offensive Agricole pour la Nourriture 
et l’Abondance) in order to achieve this ambitious target. This program implements massive investments 
in the national rice sector, notably by irrigating and cultivating unused land in the SRV and intensifying 
production of rice through double cropping. The program reaffirmed the 1.5 million tonnes of paddy 
rice to be produced by 2015 (MoA, 2008). Additional components of the program include: (i) input 
subsidies; (ii) provision of certified seed; (iii) financing of production and post-harvest machinery; and 
(iv) creation of a private sector marketing agency responsible for collecting, processing and marketing 
local rice production.

Over the past decades, state involvement in the import of rice has also decreased, and trade policies 
have become more liberalized. While import of rice is now organized by the private sector, until 1995 
the Senegalese government had a monopoly on imports of broken rice and all rice imports were subject 
to  a  quota.  In  1994,  when  the  currency  was  devalued,  tariffs  were  reduced  from  38  percent  to  16 
percent (Lançon and Benz, 3007). In 2000 the Common External Tariff of the West African Economic 
and Monetary Union was implemented; this consists of a fixed duty equivalent to a 12.7 percent ad 
valorem tariff (Masters, 2007). Given the large dependence on imports, it is not surprising that Senegal’s 
import tariffs are relatively low. Compared to other major rice-importing West African countries, such 
as Nigeria and Ghana, Senegal applies much lower border protection. In response to the food crisis 
in 2007–2008, Senegal temporarily eliminated tariffs and even subsidized imports to keep prices low. 
Exports were prohibited and consumer prices were fixed (Aker et al., 2009).

2.5 Farmer organizations

Rice farmers in the SRV region are organized into a structure of farmer organizations that are primarily 
involved  in  land  management,  provision  and  reimbursement  of  credit,  purchase  of  inputs  for  rice 
farming, and management and maintenance of the irrigation infrastructure.

In order to have access to credit from the agricultural bank (CNCAS—Caisse National de Crédit Agricole 
du  Sénégal),  farmers  need  to  be  organized  in  an  Economic  Interest  Group  (GIE—Groupement  d’Intérêt 
Economique). A GIE can consist of several farmers or one larger individual farmer. These GIEs are usually part 
of village-level unions (UV - Unions Villagois), which are headed by a president and assisted by a secretary-
general and a treasurer, and which - at their turn - are part of larger farmer organizations or federations.

The demand for credit is collectively formulated at the level of the GIE and transmitted to the UV, which 
submits the collective requirements to the CNCAS - after the submission is approved by the former 
parastatal SAED. The credit can be used for purchasing inputs (fertilizers, pesticides and seeds) which 
are distributed among the members.

Rebuilding West Africa’s food potential397

Each year, CIRIZ (Comité Interprofessionnel du Riz), a committee of farmers, farmer organizations, CNCAS 
and SAED representatives, determines a reference paddy price for the reimbursement of loans. Based on 
this price, farmer organizations calculate the number of paddy rice bags they must recover from farmers 
in order to repay the loan. After harvest, each GIE collects the corresponding volumes of rice, which is sold 
to traders by the GIE itself or by the UV, either as paddy rice or milled.

Most GIEs and unions do not engage in any more advanced form of processing or storage of rice and 
most of them sell the rice as paddy immediately after harvesting. Even at higher levels, such as village 
unions and federations, involvement of farmer organizations in processing and marketing is limited. 
With some exceptions such as the well-organized union of female rice growers in Ross Béthio, a few 
strong village-level unions, and the PINORD platform (see below), these organizations do not engage in 
collective processing and marketing beyond the sale of rice for loan repayments.

2.6. Consumer preferences

Consumer preferences differ significantly across urban and rural markets. In both markets there are four rice 
types: broken, intermediary, whole and ungraded rice. Senegalese consumers a high degree of preference for 
broken rice, but this preference is much more pronounced in urban markets than in rural markets (Rutsaert 
et al., 2013). Especially in Dakar, consumers are accustomed to imported, aromatic broken rice. In semi-urban 
centres located in the SRV rice-producing region, such as Saint-Louis and Podor, consumers are familiar with 
local rice and most of them prefer it to imported rice. In these semi-urban centres, the preference for broken rice 
is much less pronounced than in Dakar, but still higher than in rural areas. In rural areas, whole grain rice is much 
more appreciated and only 10 percent of rural rice consumption is imported. Rural consumers often purchase 
ungraded rice, and do the sorting into broken, intermediate and whole grains at home.

The preference for broken imported rice among the large - and growing - group of urban consumers, 
clearly  does  not  match  the  objective  of  reducing  the  import  dependence  by  increasing  domestic 
production. Fall et al. (2007) analysed the opinions of sellers, consumers and producers on the reasons 
for the weak position of local rice in urban markets. While producers mainly blame unfair competition 
from Asian rice as well as difficulties selling their surplus production, consumers and sellers emphasize 
differences in quality and poor marketing of domestic rice.

3. Supply chains of rice

The  previous  section  shows  there  is  a  strong  segmentation  of  markets,  corresponding  to  different 
consumer  preferences.  This  is  consistent  with  the  fact  that  the  supply  chains  of  rice  in  Senegal  are 
organized separately for imported and domestic rice, with very little overlap; only a few actors - some 
large traders in the urban areas- are involved in both supply chains. In addition, domestic rice production 
systems are very different in the SRV from those in the southern regions.

In the following section we analyse the supply chains of imported and domestic rice, both in the SRV 
and in southern Senegal. For imported rice, we briefly describe how imports and commercialization 
are  organized.  For  domestically  produced  rice,  we  describe  the  functioning  of  input  markets,  the 
organization of rice production and processing, and whether - and through which channels - rice is 
commercialized.

Chapter 12. Smallholder participation in value chains: The case of rice in Sénégal398

3.1 Import market chain

Given that 65 percent of rice consumed is sourced abroad, the import market chain is the most important 
one in terms of volume. Imported rice dominates the rice market in Dakar and in some of the other 
large cities.

In 1996, 43 importers were active in the Dakar market. After significant consolidation during the past 
decade,  there  are  currently  only  about  ten  regular  importers,  and  four  of  them  are  responsible  for 
66 percent of the imports (USAID, 2009). Large importers buy huge quantities (ships) of rice, while a 
number of smaller importers buy rice by the container. Rice is then sold to wholesalers in Dakar. An 
important share of imported rice passes through only four large wholesalers and is then distributed to 
semi-wholesalers and finally to retailers and small shops in Dakar and towns further inland. Often semi-
wholesalers also own trucks and organize the transport.

3.2 Domestic rice channel: Senegal River Valley

As described earlier, virtually all of the marketed domestic rice is produced in the SRV. A state run 
monopoly  supplies  subsidized  fertilizer,  sold  at  40  percent  below  the  market  price.  A  number  of 
private actors are authorized to multiply seeds, which must then be tested by public laboratories and 
conditioned in Seed Sorting Centers (USAID, 2009). In order to obtain credit from the agricultural 
bank (CNCAS) farmers are required to be part of a GIE and to use certified seed. In addition to this 
system of subsidized credit through GIEs, private lenders may provide credit at substantially higher 
interest rates. While the organization of credit provision through GIEs facilitates farmers’ access to 
credit, the monopoly of the agricultural bank, and of the state-run supplier of fertilizer and seed, 
along with the associated bureaucracy, results in an inefficient provision of inputs. 

After the rice for credit reimbursement is collected by the GIE, each individual farmer chooses what 
to do with the remainder of his production. Overall, about one third of SRV rice is sold collectively for 
the reimbursement of credit, one third is sold individually to small traders and one third is kept for 
consumption (USAID, 2009). 

Transformation of paddy into rice happens through two parallel processing systems. Small, informal mills, 
often at the village level, simply process paddy to rice by removing the husk of the grain. However, in response 
to higher prices and demand for quality from urban end-markets, larger semi-industrial mills are expanding 
capacity to produce processed rice. Both types of rice mills usually act as service providers. Farmers or (more 
often) traders bring the paddy to the mills and pay a fixed amount per tonne for milling.

Most farmers sell paddy or rice through small, informal intermediary traders (banabanas). These traders 
often buy small quantities of paddy at the field and process them through the small village mills. They sell 
the rice at weekly markets in the interior of the country, or to wholesalers in the cities. These intermediary 
traders are responsible for a large number of uncoordinated, small scale transactions. Traders selling in 
urban markets often buy higher quality rice at the industrial mills or buy larger quantities of paddy rice 
from intermediary traders or farmers and have it processed at the industrial mills themselves.

These different types of traders correspond to different markets. Less than half of the local commercialized rice 
reaches the urban and semi-urban markets. The other half is sold in rural areas further inland. While production 
systems are quite similar for these two markets - both originating from the same type of smallholder farmers 
in the SRV—the degree of processing and the marketing channels are different. Rice for urban markets is 

Rebuilding West Africa’s food potential399

purified and sifted into homogeneous size categories and sold to traders who buy larger volumes at the rice 
mills. For rice sold to rural areas, quality and sifting is less important. The marketing is less organized and 
consists of small volumes sold by producers or producer groups to small, informal traders.

3.3 Domestic rice channel: southern Senegal

In the southern regions of Senegal where rice production is rain-fed, yields are low, and the market chain 
of rice is not well developed. The system of GIEs providing access to credit (through the CNCAS bank) and 
inputs also exists in this region, but the volume of credit transactions is substantially smaller due to lower 
external input use and lower financial resources of farmers. Farmers generally use traditional rice seeds, 
although since 2009 improved rice seeds such as Nerica varieties are increasingly being adopted. In most 
of these regions women are responsible for rice cultivation and handle the primarily manual operations. 
The cultivation of rain-fed rice is labor intensive, which limits the cultivated area (USAID, 2009).

The processing of rice in these regions is usually done manually; small mechanical rice mills are rarely 
available. Households keep almost all of the rice for their own consumption. Rice production is considered 
a supplementary, non-commercial activity, although households might occasionally sell small quantities 
to local traders when they are in need of cash.

4. Constraints to smallholder market participation

In  Senegal,  as  has  been  observed  all  over  Africa,  a  large  number  of  staple  crop  producers  do  not 
participate significantly - or at al - in the marketing of their produce. Many farmers produce mainly for 
subsistence purposes and only a small number often with larger farms, have a commercially oriented 
strategy.  Of  those  farmers  participating  in  commercial  rice  production,  it  is  notable  how  little  they 
participate in the urban markets, which contain the largest group of rice consumers.

We begin this section with a conceptual framework on the factors that determine market participation. 
Then  we  discuss  two  issues  concerning  the  participation  of  Senegalese  farmers  in  rice  markets:  (i) 
constraints for increased participation of farmers in commercial markets in general, and (ii) constraints for 
participation in the higher value rice markets in urban areas.

4.1 Conceptual framework 

In  many  poor  rural  areas,  many  small  farmers  do  not  participate  in  markets  at  all.  Several  studies  have 
looked empirically at determinants of market participation by African farmers in traditional export crops (e.g. 
Fafchamps and Hill, 2005; Poulton et al., 2004) and high value crops (e.g. Minot and Ngigi, 2004; Humphrey 
et al. 2004; Minten et al., 2009). Goetz (1992) has analysed market participation for coarse grains in Senegal.

For staple crops in general, researchers found that many producers purchase more food grains than 
they sell, and that only a small share of food grain growers sell anything to the market at all. Three 
groups of influential factors can be identified: (1) assets (2) household specific transaction costs, and 
(3) regional conditions (Barrett, 2008).

Chapter 12. Smallholder participation in value chains: The case of rice in Sénégal400

(1).  Those households that do participate in the market typically have larger land and non-land asset 
holdings. Larger land (and other productive) assets are associated with higher yields and a higher 
marketable surplus (Barrett, 2008). The positive link between land assets and market participation 
is found all over Africa: for rice markets in Madagascar (Barrett and Dorosh, 1996), for wheat in 
Ethiopia (Bernard et al., 2008), and for maize in Kenya (Nyoro et al., 1999). 

(2).  Household specific transaction costs for market participation naturally lead some households to 
decide  to  participate  and  other  households  not  to  enter  the  market  at  all  but  to  opt  for  self-
sufficiency  instead  (De  Janvry  et  al.,  1991;  Key  et  al.,  2000).  Transaction  costs  that  are  highly 
household  specific  include,  among  other  things:  experience  and  negotiation  skills  related  to 
education level, gender or age; land assets and access to agricultural equipment; access to credit 
or liquidity availability.

(3).  Finally, commercial households are more likely to be located in zones with better market access, 
better physical and institutional infrastructure and higher potential agro-ecological characteristics. 
Regional differences in transport costs, costs of commerce, degree of competition among traders, 
etc., may also contribute to variation in the level of commercially-oriented farming (Fackler and 
Goodwin,  2001).  More  remote  locations  may  be  associated  with  bad  road  accessibility,  limited 
information on market prices and demand, and low population density, which results in limited 
aggregate demand and poor integration with broader markets.

Which of these factors most inhibit market participation - geographic factors or household specific 
transaction  costs  -  is  mainly  an  empirical  question.  Especially  when  surplus  production  volume  is 
limited, per unit transaction costs are high and market participation may be low.

Increasing  productivity  through  technological  improvement  can  contribute  to  increased  marketable 
volumes,  thereby  reducing  per  unit  costs  and  making  commercially  oriented  farming  profitable. 
However, Barrett (2008) points out that technology and market participation influence each other; 
technology adoption - for example, fertilizer use or the processing of paddy into rice - will only become 
profitable if there is a market for absorbing the surplus created. In poorly connected markets, increased 
production volumes might not reach broader markets, and local market flooding will cause adverse 
effects through rapidly falling prices.

Farmer  cooperatives  offer  another  opportunity  for  reducing  farmers’  individual  transaction  costs. 
Through joint input purchases, common storage facilities and collective marketing, fixed production or 
marketing costs can be divided over larger volumes, thereby reducing per-unit transaction costs and 
enhancing market participation.

In the remainder of this section we concentrate on market participation in Senegal. First, we look at 
market participation in general versus subsistence rice production. Following that, we discuss in more 
detail the specific constraints to rural versus urban market access.

Rebuilding West Africa’s food potential401

4.2 Constraints to market participation for Senegalese rice farmers

Regional factors clearly affect the market participation rates for rice farmers in Senegal. The degree of 
market participation differs largely across regions. The rain fed lowland ecosystem in southern Senegal, 
is a net buying region, where virtually all rice production is consumed within the region and even within 
households.  Hence, market participation is very low. The SRV is the main area of commercial irrigated 
rice production with about two thirds of rice produced being marketed. These regional differences are 
primarily  due  to  the  different  production  systems.  The  lack  of  commercial  orientation  in  the  southern 
regions is both a reason for and a consequence of poor access to credit, irrigation, inputs and consumer 
markets.  These  limiting  factors  work  against  increasing  yields  and  surplus  production  which  could  be 
marketed, although this may change with the advent of higher-yielding Nerica varieties which are being 
increasingly  adopted  in  this  region.  On  the  other  hand,  the  return  on  investment  in  improving  water 
management and input markets is clearly higher in the SRV, which explains the government’s interest in 
investing in rice production in the SRV.

Apart from these large regional differences between the irrigated SRV and the rainfed lowlands in the 
south of Senegal, there are also important differences between households situated in the same region. 
Although the SRV region is on average much more commercially oriented than the southern regions, not 
all SRV rice farmers are involved in commercial rice production and the volumes of rice sold vary greatly 
among farmers. In order to identify household specific determinants of market participation among SRV 
rice farmers, we conducted a representative household survey in the Senegal River Delta in February 2006.4 
The choice of a homogenous production area, well connected to the main road and close to Saint-Louis, 
largely cuts out market access as a source of variation, and makes it possible to isolate the household 
level determinants of smallholder market participation among SRV rice farmers.

Farmers who participate in the GIE system (including the majority of farmers in our survey area) are selling at 
least part of their production in order to repay the credit they obtained and so this system guarantees a certain 
minimum share of rice production being commercialized in the entire SRV region. But the GIEs do not collect 
more rice than is needed for reimbursement. Every farmer decides individually what he/she wants to do with 
the remainder of his/her produce.5  Some will keep it all for consumption, some will sell immediately to traders, 
while others will store some of their production to sell later. In the remainder of this section we will use the 
terms  market participation and selling farmers for those farmers who decide to sell rice individually, meaning 
in addition to the rice which is sold collectively by the farm organization to reimburse credit. To account for the 
rice which is not consumed by the households, one should add both types of sale.

In what follows, we first give a general description of the characteristics of rice farmers in our sample. Then we 
discuss how these characteristics differ between farmers who are selling rice individually, and farmers who are 
not selling rice (apart from the collective sales of paddy rice for credit reimbursement). Out of the 245 farmers 
in our sample, 182 farmers are selling rice individually.

Senegalese  rice  production  is  almost  entirely  through  smallholder  agriculture,  including  in  the  SRV 
region.  The  average  amount  of  land  assets  of  rice  farmers  in  our  sample  is  3  ha.  The  average  area 
cultivated is 2.5 ha in the rainy season (Table 2), and more than half of the farmers cultivate an area of 
less than 1.5 ha. The average production of rice over the whole year was about 11 tonnes. Most farmers 

4 The sample includes 245 rice producing households and is representative of the Delta region of the Senegal river 
(zone Gandon, Ross Béthio and Ronkh), the region of the SRV closest to Saint-Louis. More details on the survey can 
be found in the Annex.
5  Only  in  a  few  exceptional  cases  do  GIEs  go  beyond  the  repayment  of  loans,  by  collectively  organizing  the 
processing and sale of rice.

Chapter 12. Smallholder participation in value chains: The case of rice in Sénégal402

produce in the rainy season only, but 14.5 percent of rice farmers produce rice both in the rainy and the 
dry season (double cropping).

Table 2. Area of rice cultivation, production, and distribution of production to different destinations by farmers 

in the Senegal River Delta, 2005

Area (average) (ha)

Area (median) (ha)

Production (tonnes) 

Double cropping (%)

% sold collectively for credit reimbursement

% consumed

% sold

% donated

Source: Authors’ calculation based on own survey.

Rainy season

(July-Jan)

Dry season
(Febr-June)

Total

(2005–2006)

2.49

1.5

9.8

57.7

21.8

16.4

4.1

100

1.37

1

6.3

38.0

30.9

24.3

6.7

100

10.8

14.5

55.2

22.5

17.9

4.4

100

Overall,  more  than  half  of  the  production  (55.2  percent)  in  2005  was  sold  through  the  farmer 
organizations in order to pay back the loans.6 Apart from these sales for reimbursing credit, on average 
18 percent of rice production was sold by farmers individually. Hence, total sales came to more than 70 
percent. About 22.5 percent of rice production was consumed by the farming household itself.

In our sample, 75 percent of rice farmers were selling rice individually (Table 4). The large majority (62 
percent) of these had first sold some rice collectively through the farmer organization to repay loans 
while 13 percent did not participate in the credit system of the GIEs and sold rice only on an individual 
basis. Most of these are larger farmers who could probably rely on other sources of financing. Of the 
25 percent not selling rice individually, 3 percent sold rice through the farmer organization for loan 
repayment and kept the rest for subsistence. The other 22 percent of farmers produced purely for 
subsistence purposes and did not even sell rice collectively for credit reimbursement.

Because  of  the  relatively  high  rice  productivity  in  the  Senegal  River  Delta  and  the  relatively  good 
road connection to the rest of the country, it is not surprising that the share of farmers selling rice 
individually (75 percent) in our sample is high compared to the rest of the country and compared to 
percentages of staple food sellers reported in other studies.7  Note that this is considerably higher than 
the one third of rice production sold for credit reimbursement that was estimated by USAID (2009), 
which might be related to our survey data corresponding to a year of low production.

Yet even within this commercially-oriented region, nearly one quarter of farmers are producing for 
subsistence. And also among farmers participating in the marketing of rice, there are large differences 
in the volumes of rice sold.

6 Note that this is considerably higher than the one third of rice production sold for credit reimbursement that was 
estimated by USAID (2009), which might be related to our survey data corresponding to a year of low production. 
7 In East and South Africa, percentages of sellers among staple food producers vary between 10 and 40 percent 
(Barrett, 2008).

Rebuilding West Africa’s food potential403

Table  3  illustrates  some  general  characteristics  of  farmers  selling  (commercially  oriented  farmers)  and 
farmers not selling rice. Sellers tend to have larger areas of cultivation and higher output and yields. There 
seems to be no difference in age or education level. Members of farmer organizations are more likely to 
be rice sellers, as are double cropping farmers. Commercially oriented farmers have a higher income and 
more land and non-land assets. A larger population corresponds to a higher percentage of sellers in the 
village. The insignificant difference in distances to a paved road and to Saint-Louis confirms our initial 
hypothesis that market access is fairly homogenous among farmers in the Senegal River Delta.

Table 3. Household assets and characteristics of farmers selling and farmers not selling rice

Area of rice cultivation (ha)a

Total rice production (kg)

Yield (tonnes/ha)

Double cropping (% of farmers)

Age 

Elementary education

Female household head

Union member

Total land owned (ha)

Non-land assets 

Total income (FCFA)

Per capita income (FCFA)

Agricultural income (FCFA)

Village population 

Distance to Saint Louis (km)

Distance to paved road (km)

Number of observations (n=245)

t-test

***

***

***

***

***

**

***

**

***

*

***

***

Farmers not 
selling rice

Farmers 
selling rice

1.40

4,538

3.43

6.3%

55.7

7.9%

0%

38.1%

1.94

207.1

719,723

136,487

397,027

977.5

59.3

9.6

63

(25.7%)

3.53

12,920

4.78

29.7%

56.1

9.3%

5.5%

51.1%

3.32

1125.6

1,233,208

169,877

727,632

1287.4

57.2

7.9

182

(74.3%)

Source: Authors’ calculations based on own survey.
Notes: Fixed exchange rate: euro1 = 655.957 FCFA. Significant differences (two-sided t-test) are indicated by *: 
p=0.10, **: p=0.05, ***: p=0.01.

a Area, production and yield refer to total area and production, i.e. the sum of area and production of wet and 
dry season.

Chapter 12. Smallholder participation in value chains: The case of rice in Sénégal404

These descriptive statistics indicate that in areas with much commercial activity, household assets are 
an  important  determinant  of  market  participation.  This  is  in  line  with  other  studies  showing  that 
privately  held  assets  impose  important  constraints  to  market  participation  (Boughton  et  al.  2006; 
Cadot et al. 2006; Minten and Barrett, 2006). We do find that a large village - reflecting larger local 
demand - increases the likelihood of selling rice. While distances to the road and to Saint-Louis are 
not found to be important within our study area, infrastructural constraints at the regional level  are 
obviously very important in explaining major differences between the two main rice producing regions 
(Senegal River Valley and southern rainfed low-lands).

The majority of farmers in the Senegal River Delta (74.3 percent) participate in individual sales of rice, 
yet volumes traded are very unequally distributed. Only 2 percent of farmers account for 25 percent of 
total rice sales; 7 percent of farmers sell 50 percent of the total volume sold, and 26 percent of farmers 
account for 75 percent of rice sold. We refer to those in that 26 percent as large sellers.

Differences  in  household  characteristics  and  assets  between  sellers  and  non-sellers  are  also  found 
when comparing large sellers and small sellers. 

Table 4. Characteristics of large and small individual rice sellers

Small sellers 

Large sellers 

(accounting for 
25% of total 

(accounting for 
75% of total 

sales)

sales)

Area rice cultivation (ha)

Yield in rainy season (tonnes/ha)

Yield in dry season (tonnes/ha)

Double cropping (% of farmers)

% of total farm production sold

Average volume sold (kg)

Average price (FCFA/kg)

% of farmers selling to intermediary traders

% of farmers selling to traders in urban market

Number of observations (n=182)

Source: Authors’ calculations based on own survey.

1.84

4.14

4.82

26.3

14.2

952

99.4

86.5

2

137

5.98

5.08

5.30

40.0

28.4

8,840

101.2

80.9

6

45

Total

(2005–2006)

10.8

14.5

55.2

22.5

17.9

4.4

100

Table 4 also indicates the importance of farmer organizations in the commercial orientation of farmers. 
Farmer organizations usually only oversee the demand for credit and the distribution of inputs and 
irrigation water. Without personal funds or individual access to credit, it is necessary to be part of a 
farmer organization in order to be able to cultivate a significant area. Through facilitating access to 
credit and inputs, and thereby increasing production, union membership can enhance individual market 
participation, even when the farmer organizations usually do not arrange for the commercialization of 
surplus production. The main reason for the limited commercial activity of farmer organizations is the 
heterogeneity of producers. While some farmers are in urgent need of cash at the end of the season 

Rebuilding West Africa’s food potential405

and prefer to sell the paddy rice immediately after (or even before) harvesting, others have the option 
to postpone sales and transform the paddy into sorted rice themselves and store it for a higher price 
season. The credit provided to farmer organizations can only be used for the purchase of seeds and 
inputs. Farmer organizations do not negotiate marketing credit which would allow them to collect, 
transform and store all surplus rice production and advance some of the total sales revenue to farmers. 
Moreover, farmer organizations often lack the management and marketing skills to perform these tasks.

PINORD (Platforme d’Appui aux Initiatives du Nord), an Oxfam-funded platform of farmer organizations, 
is trying to improve the commercial activity of farmer organizations by providing credit and monitoring 
quality  of  a  newly  created  rice  brand,  Rival®.  However,  while  PINORD’s  model  for  the  increased 
commercialization of quality SRV rice may be a good preliminary step toward competitiveness, the 
operational scale is currently too small to have a significant impact on the market. PINORD marketed 
500 tonnes of milled Rival® rice, produced by 10 rural micro-enterprises (RMEs)8 in 2007, 1800 tonnes 
by 108 RMEs in 2008, 2 600 tonnes by 150 RMEs in 2009, and 6 200 tonnes by 350 RMEs in 2010. 
However, the product was only available as far as the milling factories in the Senegal River Delta (50 
km from Saint-Louis) and did not reach the urban market of Saint-Louis. In 2011–2012, no Rival® was 
commercialized due to discontinued external funding (Demont et al., forthcoming).

4.3 Constraints on access to local and urban markets

Not  all  farmers  who  produce  a  marketable  surplus  of  rice  and  are  willing  to  sell  it  have  access  to 
the same market channels. In the rain-fed zones there is hardly any commercial activity at all, even 
locally. In the SRV, local rice markets are better developed - more so in the Delta region than further 
inland  -  although  transaction  costs  are  still  considerable  and  markets  are  highly  fragmented.  The 
organization of input and credit provision by farmer organizations results in a minimum volume of 
rice being sold in order to repay loans. Usually farmer organizations sell to local intermediary traders 
(banabanas) who sell the rice on local or regional markets further inland and (less frequently) to traders 
in urban markets. Sales made by farmers individually are often smaller, more irregular transactions. 
Most farmers sell a part of their production to bana-banas after harvesting and store another part for 
consumption or for sales at a later time. Farmers and farmer organizations usually do not have long 
term relationships or agreements with these traders, and transactions are ad hoc. These irregular, small 
sales keep transaction costs rather high and reduce market efficiency.

Transactions with traders who are active in urban markets concern larger volumes but are less frequent. 
Some bana-banas have connections with traders in urban markets, but these transactions are also 
fragmented and irregular. Some retailers or larger urban traders buy directly from producers, but the 
total volume of SRV rice reaching urban markets remains small.

The data from our survey in the Senegal River Delta confirm this picture. In our sample, 85 percent 
of  rice  farmers  selling  individually  market  their  produce  through  intermediary  traders  (bana-banas) 
and only 8 to 9 percent sell to traders in weekly markets (Table 5). Only 3 percent (8 percent in the 
dry season) sell directly to traders in urban markets, although the price those traders pay is 15 to 20 
percent higher.9 

8 These rural micro-enterprises refer to various actors in rice production, such as farmers, service providers and 
input suppliers.
9 Note that our sample concerns the zone of the SRV that is best connected to urban markets and where farmers’ 
commercial  orientation  is  higher  than  in  other  parts  of  the  SRV  region.  Hence,  overall  percentages  of  farmers 
selling their produce to urban markets will be even lower.

Chapter 12. Smallholder participation in value chains: The case of rice in Sénégal406

Table 5. Share of farmers and prices by type of trader for the rice sold by farmers individually

Rainy season 
(July-January)

Total

(2005–2006)

% rice farmers 

average price

% rice farmers 

selling to

(FCFA/kg)

selling to

average price

85.1

8.5

2.8

2.8

103.5

91.3

123.8

95.5

80.3

9.2

7.9

-

98.6

91.4

111.7

-

Intermediary traders

Traders in weekly markets

Traders in urban markets

Sold directly on the market

Source: Authors’ calculations based on own survey.

There are two reasons for the low penetration of SRV rice in urban markets. First of all, as documented 
earlier, urban consumers prefer broken rice, sorted into categories of homogenous size and they value 
the cleanness and visual presentation of rice (Fall et al., 2007; Demont et al., forthcoming). In contrast, 
most of the local paddy rice is only transformed into milled rice at a small informal mill, but not cleaned 
and sorted (which rural women usually do at home) and it involves mainly intermediary and whole grain 
rice. Although studies show that urban consumers are willing to pay a higher price for good quality local 
rice, consumers in Dakar generally believe that local rice is of inferior quality (Fall et al., 2007). There 
clearly is a mismatch between the product demanded by the majority of Senegalese consumers and the 
product characteristics of domestic rice that is supplied to them.

Second,  transaction  costs  related  to  getting  local  supply  to  urban  consumers  are  very  high.  Road 
infrastructure  and  transportation  should  not  be  major  constraints.  A  national  road  runs  parallel  to 
the  Senegal  River,  where  irrigated  rice  production  is  concentrated.  In  fact,  limited  information  and 
unreliable quality and quantity are the main problems. Traders in Dakar have little information on the 
marketable volumes of local rice, its quality and prices. The most important constraint is probably the 
fact that transactions in local markets pass through a high number of small intermediary traders and 
there are very few actors in the chain who collect, store and sell rice in large volumes. Neither farmer 
organizations, rice millers nor local traders succeed in concentrating transactions into larger volumes.

As we have seen, farmer organizations have not been successful in collectively processing or storing 
rice in order to market better quality rice in larger quantities. The diversity of farmers makes it difficult 
to develop common marketing strategies.

Industrial rice mills could potentially serve as places to store larger volumes of rice which could then be 
sold in large quantities to traders further down the chain. Currently both small village level mills and 
industrial rice mills act only as service providers. Industrial rice millers do not have sufficient working 
capital to purchase paddy rice and they have very limited access to commercialization credit. This is 
in part because local branches of the national bank for agriculture are not allowed to provide credit 
above a certain amount without agreement from national headquarters. An earlier attempt to provide 
government supported loans to millers failed because millers could not sell the rice within the period 
of credit reimbursement and trust has not been restored since that experience.

Local traders do not have the means to buy larger quantities. The small informal traders buy very small 
quantities and focus on trading low quality, unsorted rice to the rural markets. The lack of coordination 
between  the  different  actors,  combined  with  the  small  transaction  volumes,  significantly  reduces 

Rebuilding West Africa’s food potential407

marketing margins for local rice, which reduces their incentive to invest in facilitating the flow of SRV 
rice to urban consumers. However, the recent price volatility and concomitant business risk since the 
food crisis in 2008 have led some Senegalese importers to begin gravitating toward SRV rice (Demont 
and Rizzotto, 2012).

5. Implications, policy recommendations and perspectives

Senegal is extremely dependent on imports of rice, its main staple crop. National programs to promote 
self-sufficiency,  such  as  GOANA,  are  investing  in  the  expansion  of  irrigated  plots  and  technology 
improvement in order to increase domestic rice production and reduce import dependency. 

However,  the  issue  is  not  merely  how  to  increase  production,  but  how  to  increase  the  market 
participation  of  smallholders  and  especially  how  to  integrate  rice  produced  in  the  SRV  into  urban 
markets. Our main policy recommendations start with the recognition of this mismatch between the 
characteristics of local rice and the preferences of urban consumers. Below, we offer recommendations 
to address the main constraints related to the development of rice value chains in Senegal.

5.1 Focus on demand and private sector involvement

The current set of strategies put forward by the Senegalese government in the GOANA program emphasizes 
production and fails to include significant efforts to involve private sector actors. The government’s focus 
is on production and farmer organizations, with very little attention to creating an environment to assist 
private actors in post-harvest activities and marketing.

Improved  commercialization  of  rice  will  require  establishing  conditions  that  are  more  favorable  to 
the private sector. A stable investment climate, transparent policies, large infrastructure investments 
such as irrigation, and guaranteed access to resources such as land and water, are necessary to attract 
private  investment  and  encourage  risk-averse  producers  to  engage  in  commercial  rice  production. 
More transparent criteria for land concession could motivate more commercially-oriented farmers to 
invest in land preparation and irrigation infrastructure themselves.

The  most  successful  new  development  models  start  from  the  perspective  of  demand    rather  than 
supply.10  Sustainable  incentives  for  investing  in  increased  supply  will  exist  only  if  there  is  enough 
demand to absorb the product and if the product characteristics fit the demand preferences (Demont 
and Rizzotto, 2012).

Given the large demand for rice in urban markets, there should be considerable opportunity for the 
increased development of the rice supply chain in Senegal. The potential market is much larger than 
the current level of domestic production and an increased supply of rice should therefore easily be 
absorbed by the large number of consumers in urban areas.

10 See, for example, the successful approach of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) in 
its lending operations in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union.

Chapter 12. Smallholder participation in value chains: The case of rice in Sénégal408

However, there are two important problems: (i) the quality of locally-produced rice currently does not 
correspond to what consumers want to buy; and (ii) transaction costs to bring locally-produced rice 
to the urban markets are high, which reduces marketing margins and makes it difficult for domestic 
rice  to  compete  with  the  price  of  imports.  So  the  main  challenges  are:  (i)  to  upgrade  the  quality 
of  domestic  rice  and  (ii)  to  organize  production,  processing  and  marketing  of  domestic  rice  more 
efficiently so as to reduce transaction costs.

5.2 Quality upgrading

The first challenge is how to produce the quality and type of rice that urban consumers want to buy. 
Problems related to improving quality seem not to be insurmountable, as they are not inherent to the 
country or the production system as such. Rather the main problems are due to poor processing, which 
does not conform to consumer preferences. Currently the largest share of local production passes through 
small  informal  mills  at  the  village  level,  which  are  unable  to  sort  the  rice  mechanically  or  to  remove 
foreign matter. Policies should stimulate private investments in improved processing and sorting of rice. 
Another way to improve quality is to speed up the drying process of paddy rice. Due to poor storage 
facilities, rice often is not dried quickly enough, which reduces quality or may even cause the rice to rot.

Recent evidence from experimental auctions in the urban markets of Dakar and Saint Louis confirms 
that  there  is  a  willingness  among  urban  consumers  to  pay  a  price  premium  for  local  high-quality 
rice (Demont et al., 2013; forthcoming). Under experimental conditions, the majority of Senegalese 
consumers were willing to pay an 18 percent price premium for imported Thai 100 percent broken 
rice  relative  to  conventional,  ungraded  SRV  rice.  However,  they  were  willing  to  pay  an  even  larger 
price premium, 35 percent, to obtain enhanced-quality SRV broken rice. Conventional, ungraded SRV 
rice  is  a  mix  of  varieties,  has  a  mediocre  grain  quality,  and  is  commonly  available  on  the  market. 
Imported Thai 100 percent broken rice has a grain quality somewhere between the conventional and 
the enhanced-quality SRV broken rice and contains some impurities. Enhanced quality SRV broken rice 
is purified and homogenized through one or two sifting operations. On top of the price premium of 
35 percent for enhanced quality SRV broken rice, the majority of Senegalese consumers were willing 
to add another 6 percent for a branded rice product, paying an overall price premium of 41 percent for 
PINORD’s Rival® (see Box 1) relative to conventional SRV rice. These findings suggest that Senegalese 
consumers are willing to pay for intrinsic food quality attributes and that SRV rice is able to compete 
against imported rice if post-harvest quality is tailored to consumer preferences. 11

But also breeding currently plays a role in tailoring quality to urban consumer preferences. In 2011, 
three  fragrant  rice  varieties  bred  by  AfricaRice  (Sahel  177,  328  and  329)  have  been  introduced  in 
the SRV. Given that an important market segment of urban consumers (particularly in Dakar) prefers 
imported fragrant rice, this introduction opens the door for the development of domestic value chains 
of fragrant rice and further replacing imports with domestic rice. 

11 Enhancing quality in the context of a food insecure country may seem counterintuitive at first, but is consistent 
with similar findings in Asia revealing that even the very poor have more income elastic demand for food quality than 
for food quantity (Shah, 1983).

Rebuilding West Africa’s food potential409

Box 1. Recent initiatives for quality upgrading of SRV rice

The  quality  upgrading  of  rice  might  create  opportunities  for  the  development  of  a  certain  degree  of 
coordination over the value chain. Recently, SRV producers have combined their efforts to supply a new 
enhanced-quality  SRV  broken-rice  brand  Rival®  (Riz  de  la  Vallée).  Governance  of  quality  (processing, 
cleaning and packaging) and provision of micro-financing for rural micro-enterprises in the rice sector are 
conducted by the Oxfam-funded platform PINORD. Since its inception, PINORD recognized that absence 
of marketing for local rice was a major obstacle to the mobilization of quality SRV rice onto the market. 
PINORD’s promotion strategy is fourfold: improving packaging, improving transport, increasing market 
share and points of sale in urban markets (especially in Dakar), and multimedia publicity surrounding the 
label Rival® (PINORD, 2007).

Although this initiative still faces several obstacles, and the establishment of strong relations with traders is still a 
challenge that must be addressed, it’s clear that it is possible to produce domestic rice that is perfectly acceptable 
to urban consumers. However, as hypothesized earlier, successful governance of value chains may have to come 
from downstream stakeholders closer to the demand side. Recent developments confirm this hypothesis. On 25 
November 2010, 14 Senegalese rice importers officially launched a joint venture with producers and processors 
under the name SPCRS (Société de Promotion et de Commercialisation du Riz Sénégalais). The SPCRS aims to 
buy the entire SRV paddy rice production, mill it and market it to Senegalese consumers by governing quality 
along  the  chain  through  quality  contracts  with  milling  factories  and  farmers  (Mohapatra,  2011).  Two  other 
smaller scale value chain initiatives have emerged, targeting different consumer segments in important urban 
end markets. Since 2010 importer Marieme Diouck, in partnership with USAID, has contracted with SRV farmers 
to market high quality SRV rice – branded Bourou thieb yi (the king of rices) – on the Dakar market, and the 
Belgian investor Durabilis is currently contracting with SRV farmers and millers to market medium quality SRV 
rice, branded Terral, through its local subsidiary, Secosen. These recent developments clearly illustrate the interest 
and potential of the private sector to play a lead role in the development of rice value chains in Senegal.

5.3 Vertical linkages

Industrial or semi-industrial processors of rice can play an important role in improved storing and process-
ing of rice. But industrial rice mills can only operate efficiently at a large scale and therefore a significant 
part of rice production needs to pass through the industrial mills.

While there is probably insufficient value in a staple food market such as the current rice market, and 
too  much  competition  from  local  traders  and  alternative  uses  to  make  extensive  vertical  coordination 
possible, there should be some room for supply chain-based financial innovations in the chain (see Box 
2). Supply chain-based financial instruments, such as reverse factoring – which transfer the credit risk of 
small suppliers to their more credit worthy customers – might offer a solution. A focus on lending and co-
financing of rice processors and traders might stimulate vertical linkages.

Chapter 12. Smallholder participation in value chains: The case of rice in Sénégal410

Box 2. Can the supply chain governance of high-value agricultural products be

used as a model for the development of supply chains of staple food?

In a context of imperfect markets such as in Senegal, where smallholder producers have limited or no access 
to inputs and credit, rice traders with better access to credit could solve this constraint by providing the farmer 
with a contract: the buyer would provide the required inputs (e.g. certified seed of a particular rice variety) and 
in turn the farmer would sell a specified quantity of the product to the trader at an agreed price. There are 
two different models possible: either the trader purchases rice already milled or buys paddy rice and processes 
it into milled rice using a miller as service provider. Because establishment of the contract would now allow the 
farmer to produce more and/or to produce higher quality, the contract creates a surplus. This type of chain 
governance model has been very successful in high value chains, such as the export of fresh fruit and vegetables 
in Senegal. The development and organization of these supply chains are described in detail in Chapter 9 of 
this volume. The question is whether this chain governance model could also be successful for the Senegalese 
rice sector. A number of constraints present in the rice sector make it less likely for these governance structures 
to be established.

When contract enforcement is costly, there are risks of contract breach. The farmer may decide to divert the 
inputs to other uses or he may sell to another buyer at a higher price (since this buyer does not need to recover 
the credit that was provided). On the other hand, the buyer can breach the contract by paying a lower price 
than was agreed on. If the contract creates enough surplus, compared to the situation without a contract, then 
none of the parties will be better off by breaching it and a credible commitment can be established. Only if 
enough value can be created in the chain will it be possible to develop interlinked contracts between traders or 
millers and farmers.

Staple crops such as rice are characterized by low value and the potential for quality upgrading is limited. In 
addition, the low perishability of rice makes it possible for a farmer to store his product, anticipating higher prices 
in the future, rather than respecting the contract. The large number of small intermediary traders gives farmers 
multiple selling opportunities and reduces potential reputation costs of contract breach. These factors make it 
less likely for chain governance to arise spontaneously. However, the chance of successful vertical coordination 
is likely to increase with enhanced quality and demand.

5.4 Reducing transaction costs

When investments in quality upgrading and vertical linkages have been stimulated, it is important to focus 
on improving the supply side of the market by reducing transaction costs. Aggregation points need to be 
established, where rice can be collected such that transaction volumes in the chain are sufficiently large 
and per-unit transaction costs can be reduced. Several approaches could be taken to address this need. 
Investment in physical market infrastructure could lead to the emergence of larger traders. Aggregation 
points could be established, either at the level of producer organizations (which would require better 
coordination) or at the level of industrial mills. This would allow traders to transact larger volumes, thereby 
reducing trading costs. Investment in transport infrastructure could reduce the cost for small traders to 
bring rice to the mills, thereby increasing the volumes of adequately processed rice.

Rebuilding West Africa’s food potential411

5.5 Promotion of domestic rice

Once a sufficient supply of clean, quality rice at a competitive price is ensured, investment in promoting 
Senegalese rice would be one possible strategy to stimulate the demand for local rice (see the case of 
Rival® above). However, local production must offer the characteristics demanded by consumers and 
the  major  transaction  costs  must  be  addressed.  Data  from  recent  experimental  auctions  point  to  an 
increased likelihood of consumers purchasing quality SRV rice when they are aware of it (Demont et al., 
forthcoming). The most promising channels for promotion campaigns are television and radio (Demont 
and Rizzotto, 2012), but marketing strategies based on word-of-mouth, i.e. buzz and viral processes that 
exploit influential existing social networks (female networks, tontines, trader associations, religious and 
social networks, etc.), can also have a large impact (Demont et al., 2013).

5.6 Increasing productivity in southern rain-fed rice production areas

A  different  set  of  policy  recommendations  is  needed  for  the  very  different  production  system  in 
southern Senegal. In the rain-fed rice production areas, the first concern is to increase productivity. In 
contrast to rice farmers in the SRV regions, farmers in the southern regions have very limited access 
to input and credit. If better seeds and appropriate fertilizer can be provided at an acceptable price, 
farmers may be willing to invest more in rice production than they do now. Increasing the efficiency of 
private suppliers who supply inputs for other crops could improve the accessibility and lower the price 
of inputs. Rain-fed rice production is labour-intensive so labour availability and competition for labour 
with other crops may also pose constraints to increasing production.

Finally, improving the ability to cope with risk could stimulate farmers to invest in strategies to increase 
productivity.  Risk-averse  households  are  reluctant  to  make  investments  such  as  purchasing  inputs. 
Investment  in  inputs  and  techniques  for  increasing  productivity  requires  a  willingness  to  cope  with 
risks. Building up savings and insurance mechanisms can help to stimulate more risky investments, 
including productivity enhancing strategies for rain-fed rice production.

Since the introduction of improved rice varieties, such as Nerica, productivity is dramatically increasing 
in  the  Casamance  region  to  the  extent  that  rice  production  systems  are  progressively  generating 
marketable surpluses. Moreover, consumers already prefer local rice in that region. Recent experimental 
auctions carried out by AfricaRice and USAID have shown that Nerica not only boosts productivity, but 
is also preferred by consumers in urban markets (e.g. Kolda) relative to imported rice. The more these 
production systems evolve from purely subsistence to surplus-based, the more attention will need to 
be given to value chain upgrading.

Chapter 12. Smallholder participation in value chains: The case of rice in Sénégal412

6. Annex: Description of the survey and interviews

organized in the Senegal River Delta in 2006

From  February  to  April  2006,  a  representative  household  survey  was  organized  in  the  delta  area 
of  the  SRV  region.  The  survey  covers  400  households  living  in  the  rural  communities  of  Gandon, 
Ross  Béthio  and  Ronkh.  The  sample  includes  245  rice-  producing  households.  Survey  data  include 
demographic  characteristics,  land  and  non-land  asset  holdings,  agricultural  production  and  inputs, 
off-farm employment, non-labor income, credit and savings.

The average household income in the region is around 1 million CFA, or 179 000 CFA per capita. The 
poverty rate in the area is 56 percent, which is comparable to the national average. Households in 
the region have diversified income portfolios. More than half of the total household income is derived 
from agriculture, mainly from crop production. Income from fishing and livestock is limited. Other main 
income sources are agricultural employment, self-employment and unearned income (Figure 3).

Figure 3. Income sources for households in the survey region (authors’ calculations)

Unearned income

Self-employment

Non agricultural employment

Agricultural employment

Fishing

Livestock

Crop producƟon

Total income

0

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

Yearly income in 1,000 CFA 

 

In addition, stakeholders from the different levels of farmer organizations, traders, importers, government 
representatives at SAED, and researchers at the Africa Rice Center in Saint-Louis were interviewed.

Rebuilding West Africa’s food potential413

7. References 

Aker, J.C., Block, S., Ramachandran, V. & Timmer C.P., 2009. West African Experience with the World Rice 
Crisis 2007–2008. Prepared for a Workshop on the World Rice Crisis, Chiang Mai, February 2009.

ANSD, 2006–2009. Note d’Analyse du Commerce Extérieur (NACE). Agence Nationale de la Statistique 

et de la Démographie (ANSD), Dakar, Senegal, http://www.ansd.sn/publications_NACE.html.

Barrett, C.B., 2008. Smallholder market participation: Concepts and evidence from eastern and southern 

Africa, Food Policy 33, pp. 229–317.

Danielou, M. and Ravry, C., 2005. The rise of Ghana’s pineapple industry. Africa Region Working Paper 

Series 93. Washington DC: The World Bank, Africa Region.

Bernard, T., Taffesse, A.S. & Gabre-Madhin E.2008. Impact of cooperatives on smallholder’s commercialization 

behavior: evidence from Ethiopia, Agricultural Economics, 39(2): 147-161.

de Janvry, A., Fafchamps, M. & Sadoulet, E., 1991. Peasant household behaviour with missing markets: 

some paradoxes explained. Economic Journal 101, 1400–1417.

Demont, M. & Rizzotto, A.C., 2012. Policy sequencing and the development of rice value chains in 

Senegal, Development Policy Review 30(4): 451-472.

Demont,  M.,  Rutsaert,  P.,  Ndour,  M.  &  Verbeke,  W.  Reversing  Urban  Bias  in  African  Rice  Markets: 

Evidence from Senegal, World Development, forthcoming.

Demont, M., Rutsaert, P., Ndour, M., Verbeke, W., Seck, P.A. & Tollens, E. 2013. Experimental Auctions, 
Collective  Induction  and  Choice  Shift:  Willingness-to-pay  for  Rice  Quality  in  Senegal,  European 
Review of Agricultural Economics, in press.

Fackler, P. & Goodwin, B.K., 2001. Spatial price analysis. In Gardner, B., Rausser, G., eds.  Handbook of 

Agricultural Economics, vol. 2A. Elsevier, Amsterdam.

Fafchamps, M. & Hill, R.V., 2005. Selling at the farmgate or travelling to the market, American Journal 

of Agricultural Economics 87 (3): 717–734.

Fall, A.A., Fall, C.A.K., Gningue, D.R., Ndir, B. & Ndour, M. 2007. Etude sur les critères de qualité et les 
modes de consommation du riz au Sénégal. Rapport Projet FNRAA, n° 010/AP03M010202, Fonds 
National de Recherches Agricoles et Agro-alimentaires (FNRAA), Dakar, Senegal.

Fall, A.A., & Diagne, A. 2008. Etude de la relation qualité-prix du riz produit dans la Vallée du fleuve 

Senegal., Fonds National de Recherches Agricoles et Agro-alimentaires (FNRAA), Dakar, Senegal.

FAO. 2010. FAOSTAT agriculture data, FAO, http://faostat.fao.org/.

Goetz, S.J. 1992. A selectivity model of household food marketing behaviour in sub-Saharan Africa, 

American Journal of Agricultural Economics 74(2): 444–452.

Chapter 12. Smallholder participation in value chains: The case of rice in Sénégal414

Humphrey, J., McCulloch, N. & Ota, M., 2004. The impact of European market changes on employment 

in the Kenyan horticulture sector. Journal of International Development 16 (1), 63–80.

Key, N., Sadoulet, E. & de Janvry, A., 2000. Transaction costs and agricultural household supply response. 

American Journal of Agricultural Economics 82 (2), 245–259.

Lançon, F. & Benz. H.D., 2007. Rice imports in West Africa: trade regimes and food policy formulation, Poster 

prepared for presentation at the 106th seminar of EAAE, Montpellier, France.

Masters, W.A., 2007. Distortions to Agricultural Incentives in Senegal, Agricultural Distortions Working 

Paper 41, World Bank, Washington DC.

Minot, N. & Ngigi, M., 2004. Are horticultural exports a replicable success story? Evidence from Kenya and 

Côte d’Ivoire. EPTD/MTID discussion paper. Washington DC: IFPRI.

Minten, B., Randrianarison, L. & Swinnen, J.F.M., 2009. Global Retail Chains and Poor Farmers: Evidence 

from Madagascar, World Development, vol. 37(11), pages 1728–1741.

Mohapatra, S. 2011. Quality Matters, Rice Today 10 (1): 36-37.

MoA, 2008. Programme national d’autosuffisance en riz à l’horizon 2015: Document introductif au Conseil 

Interministeriel du 4 janvier 2008, Ministry of Agriculture (MoA), Dakar, Senegal.

Nyoro, J., Kiiru, M.W. & Jayne, T.S., 1999. Evolution of Kenya’s Maize Marketing Systems in the Post-

Liberalization Era. Tegemeo Institute of Agricultural Policy and Development Working Paper 2A.

PINORD 2007. Charte de qualité du riz de la Valleé du fleuve Sénégal, Platforme d’Appui des Initiatives 

du Nord (PINORD), Saint-Louis, Senegal.

Poulton, C., Gibbon, P., Hanyani-Mlambo, B., Kydd, J., Maro, W., Larsen, M.N., Osorio, A., Tschirley, D. 
& Zulu, B., 2004. Competition and coordination in liberalized African cotton market systems, World 
Development 32 (3), 519–536.

Reardon, T. 1993. Cereals demand in the Sahel and potential impacts of regional cereals protection. 

World Development 21(1):17-35.

Rodenburg, J. & Demont, M., 2009. Potential of herbicide-resistant rice technologies for sub-Saharan 

Africa. AgBioForum 12(3–4), 313–325.

Rutsaert, P., Demont, M. & and Verbeke, W. 2013. Consumer preferences for rice in Africa. In Wopereis, M.C.S., 

D. Johnson, T. Horie, E. Tollens, and A. Jalloh, eds. Realizing Africa’s Rice Promise. 

Wallingford, UK: CABI Publishing. Seck, P.A., Tollens, E., Wopereis, M.C.S., Diagne, A. & and Bamba, I. 
2010. Rising trends and variability of rice prices: Threats and opportunities for sub-Saharan Africa. 
Food Policy 35(5):403-411.

Shah, C.H. 1983. Food preferences, poverty and the nutrition gap. Economic Development and Cultural 

Change 32(1):121–148.

Rebuilding West Africa’s food potential415

Swinnen, J., Vandeplas, A. & Maertens, M., 2010. Governance and surplus distribution in commodity 
value chains in Africa, In Sarris, A. & Morrison J., eds. Food security in Africa: Market and trade 
policy in staple foods in Eastern and Southern Africa, Food and Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations, Rome, Italy.

USAID, 2009. Global food security response: Senegal rice study, United States Agency for International 

Development (USAID), Washington, D.C., USA. 

Chapter 12. Smallholder participation in value chains: The case of rice in Sénégal