Journal of Family Violence (2019) 34:769–780
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10896-019-00058-y

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Gender-Based Violence in Senegal: its Catalysts and Connections
from a Community Perspective

Timothy R Werwie 1,2
Claudia Vondrasek 1,2 & Mamadou Mbaye 3 & Hannah Mills 1,2 & Kuor Kumoji 1,2 & Stella Babalola 1,2

& Zoe J-L Hildon 2 & Abibou Diagne Camara 3 & Oumoul Khairy Mbengue 2 &

Published online: 19 April 2019
# Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2019

Abstract
Gender-based violence is associated with an array of negative health outcomes for women and limits their opportunities to fully
participate in society. Only recently have studies begun to explore the interconnectedness of emotional, physical and sexual
gender-based violence. This qualitative study sought to understand how men and women in Senegal perceive various forms of
gender-based violence, their connections, and who could best promote change among perpetrators of violence. Community focus
group discussions that used structured exercises adapted from Participatory Learning and Action group activities were carried out
in urban and rural settings in seven regions of Senegal. Groups were sampled for maximum variation within rural and urban
settings in each region (n = 28 groups and n = 267 participants). Male and female groups in both urban and rural settings
described each form of violence similarly. Examples of emotional violence centered around home finances, neglect, and depen-
dency. Emotional violence between male and female spouses escalated to physically and sexually violent behaviors, uniquely
directed at women and girls. Physical violence was described in two levels: acceptable and unacceptable. Sexual violence was
described as common within households but unreported. Economic considerations cross-cut each form of violence. The findings
from this study contribute to conceptual definitions and understandings of GBV from a community perspective to better inform
programmatic and communication approaches for the reduction of GBV in Senegal. Challenges will remain until the global
community can more effectively address equitable access to financial resources among the world’s poorest.

Keywords Senegal . Gender-based violence . Economic violence . Community perspectives

One in three women throughout the world experiences
gender-based physical or sexual violence in her lifetime
(Abrahams et al. 2014; Devries et al. 2013). A recent review
of survey data from 96 countries estimates that over half of
children in the world experienced emotional, physical, or sex-
ual violence in the preceding year (Hillis et al. 2016). Male-to-

Timothy R Werwie, Zoe J-L Hildon and Abibou Diagne Camara contrib-
uted equally to this work.

* Timothy R Werwie

tim.werwie@jhu.edu

1 Department of Health, Behavior, and Society, Johns Hopkins

Bloomberg School of Public Health (JHSPH), Baltimore, MD, USA

2 Center for Communication Programs (CCP), Johns Hopkins
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD, USA

3 Center for Communication Programs (CCP), Affiliated on Neema

Project, Bureau IntraHealth, Dakar, Senegal

female gender-based violence (GBV) is associated with a va-
riety of negative health outcomes for women (Campbell 2002;
Ellsberg et al. 2008), including adverse pregnancy and repro-
ductive health outcomes (Silverman and Raj 2014), reduced
use or discontinuation of modern contraception (Maxwell
et al. 2015; Raj et al. 2016), disproportionate exposure to
HIV (Durevall and Lindskog 2015; Kayibanda et al. 2012),
and an array of psychiatric disorders, including depression,
anxiety, and suicide (Devries et al. 2013; Ellsberg and
Emmelin 2014; Ludermir et al. 2008). GBV also limits the
degree to which women are able to work to earn an income,
or make decisions about their own health (Fawole 2008; Vyas
and Watts 2009; WHO 2013). It comes as no surprise that the
study of GBV and interventions aimed to eliminate it predom-
inantly focus on services available for women, in relation to
intimate male partners (Abramsky et al. 2011; Ellsberg et al.
2008; Fleming et al. 2015a; Garcia-Moreno et al. 2006).
However, neglecting to also understand how male partners’
experiences with violence contributes to its perpetration will

770

J Fam Viol (2019) 34:769–780

only limit the extent to which policies and interventions suc-
ceed in eliminating GBV against women.

Several studies have shown that GBV in sub-Saharan
Africa is pervasive (Kishor and Bradley 2012; MacQuarrie
et al. 2014). Senegal ranks number 162 on the UNDP
Human Development Index, placing it among the lowest in
the world for gender equality (UNDP 2018). The most recent
Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) in Senegal reports
that 24% of men and 60% of women agree that it is acceptable
for a man to beat his wife for at least one of five scenarios
described in the survey module on opinions of domestic vio-
lence: burning the food; arguing with him; going out without
telling him; neglecting the children; or refusing to have sexual
intercourse with him (DHS 2012). On the surface, such a
measurement seems straightforward, but upon further consid-
eration the measurement becomes more nuanced. In the con-
text of a marriage between a husband and a wife—or in a
polygamous household, as is common in Senegal—an act of
physical or sexual violence committed against a woman can-
not be accurately interpreted in isolation from the dynamic
escalation that preceded the act. Studies in high-income coun-
tries demonstrate that the various forms of violence—e.g.
physical, sexual, and emotional—do not occur in isolation of
each other (Fulu et al. 2017; Guedes et al. 2016; Lansford and
Deater-Deckard 2012). Only recently in low- and middle-
income contexts have the relationship dynamics and catalytic
behaviors that
to similar
analyses (Fry and Elliott 2017; Fulu et al. 2017). Likewise,
there is a growing consideration of how community
members themselves define and perceive the various
forms of violence in relation to each other (Namy et al.
2017; Vyas and Watts 2009).

lead to GBV become central

Gender inequality and harmful social norms are suggested
to be root causes of GBV (Fulu et al. 2017; Heise 2011;
Jewkes 2002; Michau et al. 2015; Namy et al. 2017). It has
been suggested elsewhere that attitudes toward GBV are asso-
ciated with variables such as age, education, occupation, mar-
ital status, and place of residence (Vyas and Watts 2009).
Similarly, restricted autonomy of women and neighborhood
poverty were shown to be associated with an increased likeli-
hood of tolerating and committing GBV, as was witnessing or
experiencing violence as a child (Chiang et al. 2018; Fleming
et al. 2015b; Uthman et al. 2009). Given that Senegal experi-
ences low educational attainment, poor health outcomes, and
general conditions of poverty, it is likely that occurrences of
GBV are common and more nuanced than quantitative
population surveys suggest.

This current study used structured group activities in seven
regions of concentration in Senegal, as identified by USAID,
aiming to explore community perspectives on physical, emo-
tional, and sexual violence. The objectives were (1) to define
these experiences from the community perspective; (2) to
elaborate any patterns of violent behaviors between spouses,

their catalysts and connections that emerge from discussions
throughout group activities; and (3) to identify the primary
influencers that community members considered able to inter-
vene on behalf of victims of GBV. Our analysis is assembled
and reported into a narrative account that considers potential
differences between sexes and urban and rural environments.
The findings from this study will contribute to conceptual
definitions and understandings of GBV from a community
perspective to inform programmatic and communication ap-
proaches for the reduction or elimination of GBV in Senegal.

Methods

Study Background and Design

We undertook a qualitative study of activity-based
Community Focus Group Discussions (CFGDs) in seven re-
gions of Senegal: Saint-Louis (SL), Tambacounda (TB),
Kolda (KL), Matam (MT), Kédougou (KD), Sédhiou (SD)
and Diourbel (DB). These regions have been identified as
‘concentration’ areas in need of increased intra-agency efforts
under the USAID Neema program. The Neema program aims
to improve uptake of health services and behaviors using gen-
der sensitive interventions and gender infused programmatic
strategies. This current research was commissioned as part of
formative and baseline research by USAID to inform under-
standing of broader issues affecting women and children’s
access to health care, and the gender landscape in Senegal
today. The Neema project aims to implement the Integrated
Service Delivery and Healthy Behaviors mechanisms and re-
lated behavior change communication to support the
Government of Senegal to sustainably reduce maternal, neo-
natal and child mortality and morbidity. We describe our
methods following the consolidated criteria for reporting qual-
itative research checklist (COREQ) (Tong et al. 2008).

Theoretical Framework

Community focus group discussions (CFGDs) used structured
exercises derived from a interpretivist perspective, using
methods adapted from Participatory Learning and Action
(PLA) (Appel et al. 2012) and Participatory Action Learning
System (PALS) approach (Mayoux 2005). The theoretical un-
derpinning of this approach therefore rests on communities
themselves recounting their own problems and solutions.
Peer led discussions were therefore used to identify problems
from the community’s own perspective, and group exercises
were used to help generate culturally informed discussion and
interpretations of the problems identified. This collective nar-
ration and consensus driven approach yields a narrative rather
than thematic reporting style, which seeks to build a picture of
shared experiences, and ways of defining and influencing and

J Fam Viol (2019) 34:769–780

771

better understanding GBV. Therefore, rather than simply list-
ing salient themes by topic – we allowed the topics themselves
to be determined and unpacked by the groups, and the first
level of analysis to unfold inductively, as per the interpretive
tradition.(Thorne 2008).

Research Team and Reflexivity

The CFGDs were facilitated by researchers familiar with in-
teractive methods, aiming for the group to co-facilitate, and
co-create meaning during a series of shared tasks. We encour-
aged the groups to agree on a single, priority behavior, and
then focus the remaining group discussion on this chosen
behavior, guided by PLA techniques (described below).

ZH, a senior social scientist led the in-country piloting and
training of the method, working closely with a local counter-
part, OKM, who is also trained in and has longstanding expe-
rience of qualitative approaches. The training and field lead-
ership was managed by ABC, a senior Sociologist, and qual-
itative local consultant. Up to three facilitators helped to run
the group as follows: one observer ensured audio recordings
were working and took photos of the activity tools; the second
facilitator explained and set up the field exercises, as well as
ran the group activities; a third facilitator co-facilitated as
needed. Groups were led by facilitators of the same gender,
although different gender co-facilitators sometimes supported
the data collection; it was found that permitting gender differ-
ences in the co-facilitation, if carefully introduced and man-
aged, still allowed for comfortable dynamics, and open
exchanges.

Analysts included TW, a trained qualitative public health
specialist, with experience of living and working in Senegal,
who reviewed preliminary analysis by ABC, integrating these
into a full re-analysis, a process that was supported by ZH. All
members of the team spoke French and were able to commu-
nicate and analyze data directly in French.

Participant Recruitment

Participants were recruited spontaneously for maximum vari-
ation, by door to door knocking or through community forums
within rural and urban or peri-urban settings in each of seven
USAID regions of concentration (n = 28 total groups 4 per
region; 14 urban, 14 rural, 2 of each per region; n = 267 total
participants: 134 urban, 133 rural). Sample sizes in each re-
gion were as follows: SL (n = 40), TB (n = 35), KL (n = 38),
MT (n = 40), KD (n = 36), SD (n = 39) and DB (n = 39).
Community leaders, such as local religious leaders or neigh-
borhood associations were also identified by field staff and
drawn on to help recruit as needed (e.g. in rural settings where
program staff were not as well integrated). In each case the
project and its objectives were presented to eligible and
available participants.

Participant eligibility was based primarily on age and
included women emancipated by marriage of ages 15–
17 years old, and married or unmarried women of 18–
45 years of age and married or unmarried men aged
18–45 years. The maximum age for participation at this
baseline stage of the project was 45 years so that by the
end of the multi-year project no one would exceed the
maximum age of inclusion eligibility of 49 years of age.
Each region comprised of separate male and female ur-
ban groups, and male and female rural groups, that each
comprised of 5–10 participants (Table 1).

Data collection occurred over a three-month period,
from May to July 2017. Group activity sessions typical-
ly lasted around 2.5 h and groups convened only once.
The behavioral list included broad categories of: emo-
tional, sexual, and physical violence. We also asked
about forced and underage marriage and female genital
cutting, although these latter behaviors are integrated
into the broader categories and not analyzed separately
herein.

Participants were first asked to spontaneously decide
what the terms emotional violence, physical violence, and
sexual violence meant to them and to use these definitions
in their discussions during the ten stones activity (Fig. 1a).
In this activity small rocks were distributed for each form of
violence across the categories of ‘often’, ‘sometimes’, or
‘rarely’ problematic in their communities. This activity
forced groups to reach a consensus, and through this pro-
cess to elicit nuanced insights into the degree to which
communities considered each form problematic and why
or why not. The final ranking of behaviors through the
ten stones decided the focal behavior that each individual
group would discuss for the rest of the session (e.g. emo-
tional, physical, or sexual violence). After reaching consen-
sus on which form of violence to focus on, participants
performed the root cause-solutions-consequence tree
mapping exercise (Fig. 1b). This exercise sought to identify
why problems occur, what might be done, and the conse-
quences if they were to continue without any intervention.
Our analysis focused on the portion of this activity that asks
why a problem occurs to further inform community percep-
tions of violence. Finally, the circles of influence activity
prompted groups to reach consensus through deliberative
discussions around who was most impactful to positively
influence perpetrators of GBV to change their behaviors
(Fig. 1c). In this context, ‘to influence’ means intervene
on behalf of a victim of GBV or to promote change
among perpetrators of GBV. This exercise positions the
problematic behavior at the center of a trio of concen-
‘none’.
tric circles,
Participants placed cards with titles and names of people listed
on the cards inside the most apt circle according to their level
of influence.

labelled as ‘more’,

‘less’ or

772

Table 1 Participant
characteristics

J Fam Viol (2019) 34:769–780

Women

Men

Rural (N = 68)

Urban (N = 66)

Rural (N = 66)

Urban (N = 67)

41 (14.5)

38 (12.8)

40 (15.4)

35 (14.5)

52
36
12

50
50

35
65

100
0

45
23
32

28
72

38
62

97
3

36
41
23

44
56

26
74

100
0

24
12
64

56
44

11
89

100
0

Age (mean (sd))
Level of education (%)

None
Primary
Secondary +

Employment (%)

Paid work
No paid work

Marital status (%)

Polygamy
Monogamy
Religion (%)

Muslim
Christian

Data Collection

Data was recorded and transcribed using structured data re-
cording sheets adapted from the ‘expanded notes’ (Halcomb
and Davidson 2006) approach. These were done in situ, di-
rectly after each focus group, and translated directly into
French from Wolof. A data recording sheet helped data col-
lectors to organize field notes by PLA task, behavior, and
activity. Each session was therefore transcribed into the ex-
panded note form based on recorded observations and synthe-
sizing these with the relevant conversations extracted by lis-
tening to audios recordings. The recordings were also used to
add in salient verbatim quotes. Expanded notes were shared

with the research team daily, checked for quality by ABC and
approved by ZH. Participant checking of the expanded notes
or findings was not used.

The bulk of the data for our first objective was collected
during the ten stones activity, when each group was reaching a
consensus opinion regarding each definition and form of vio-
lence. To a lesser extent, the ‘why’ portion of the causes,
consequence, and solutions mapping exercise further in-
formed the analysis for objective 1. The circles of influence
activity and solutions portion of the tree mapping activity
informed objective 2. Objective 3 represents a synthesis of
these data to find patterns and connections between forms of
violence.

Fig. 1 Photos of tools used
during group activities. a Ten
stones ranking; b Root cause-
solutions-consequences tree map-
ping; c Circles of influence

J Fam Viol (2019) 34:769–780

Data Analysis

In order to facilitate the analysis ABC was present in each of
the 28 sessions and helped ensure quality control during the
collection of expanded notes. Based on the amount of data
generated, an initial analysis was undertaken by ABC to or-
ganize and extract preliminary themes. This analysis was con-
sidered alongside the expanded notes, which were organized
into ATLAS.ti to be further analyzed and coded by TW. We
organized the data by behaviors and the group activities.
These codes were compared to the preliminary analysis and
checked for consistency by ZH, who conducted blind double-
coding for 10% of the data. Men’s and women’s perceptions
are presented following an interpretivist approach, which has
therefore guided the deliberate reporting of shared community
narratives of GBV, rather than relying on lists of themes, as per
more deductive traditions.

Analysis considered the possibility for differences between
urban and rural settings, however no appreciable thematic
differences emerged from the data to support direct compari-
sons between rural and urban groups (i.e. rural groups and
urban groups reported roughly homogenous perceptions of
violence and its influencers). Therefore, the results reported
below are not disaggregated by zone of residence.
Comparisons, where appropriate, are noted throughout to
highlight when thoughts and ideas recorded during data col-
lection are attributable to an urban or rural group, male or
female, or any combination therein.

Ethical Review

Full ethical review was undertaken by the John Hopkins
University Institutional Review Board (IRB) in May 2018,
and Local IRB granted from the Comité d’éthique du
Ministère de la Santé et de l’Action Sociale in Senegal before
data collection began. Signed informed consent was sought
from all participants and the CFGDS conducted in confiden-
tial settings. Permission was granted to use photos of the tools;
although due to the sensitive nature of these data, their region-
al provenance is obscured in the current analysis.

Results

Community Definitions of Violence

Emotional Violence Unlike the other forms of violence de-
scribed below, emotional violence was described as recipro-
cally committed between spouses. Group deliberations about
emotional violence were rooted in concepts related to home
finances and employment, or the lack thereof. More specifi-
cally, discussions centered on the enforced financial depen-
dence of women, the deliberate withholding of financial

773

resources from them, and how this initiates a cycle of trans-
gressions that escalate to physically and sexually violent
behaviors.

Women’s experiences with emotional violence often began
through early or forced marriage. Several groups described
how young girls attempt running away from home or threaten
suicide to escape or avoid a forced marriage. Young boys are
also sometimes promised by their parents to marry someone
chosen since birth. In either case, children who refuse to marry
the person chosen by their parents were believed in one
women’s group to reflect poorly on the mother. Mothers there-
fore maintain a stake in the success of an arranged marriage to
preserve their own sense of respect and good standing in their
communities despite the objections of their children.

Women and girls who married left their family home to live
with their in-laws. Women’s groups described experiences of
hostility from the mother-in-law and complicated power and
bargaining dynamics between older co-wives in polygamist
households. Women’s groups described feelings of isolation
and sadness, often in terms of the discordance between their
hopeful expectations of marriage and its realities. Groups said
that while newer or young wives may lament the hostility of
their new surroundings, the introduction of a new wife into
polygamist households precedes the abandonment and neglect
of an older co-wife: BWhen men take a second wife they stop
giving you food, or drinks, or even soap, and you can imagine
how we suffer, and in our community, in cases like this, there is
misery^ [Women, KL, Rural].

In the face of self-described misery, women and men’s
groups both described common tools of retaliation: the refusal
of sex, public humiliation of her spouse by verbal ridicule or
belittlement of his inability to provide for his family, or the
refusal to perform expected household chores. Men’s groups
discussed women’s ‘materialism’ and demands for money as
an attack on his ability to provide for his family, thus hurting
his pride. Then when women are perceived by their husband
to have acted in defiance of his authority, he initiates several
retaliatory tactics: blatant shows of purposeful neglect of their
wife/wives by displaying preference for one wife to the detri-
ment of another, or by courting a new girlfriend entirely. In
other cases, he can refuse to communicate, publicly humiliate,
or return home late to deliberately upset his wife: B[Men]
come home late at night only to hurt [their] wife. He refuses
to consume the meals that the wife prepares or does not speak
to her^ [Men, TB, Urban].

Men and women both cited the enforced financial depen-
dency of wives on their husbands coupled with a denial of
permission to work outside the home as significant forms of
emotional violence: BWomen experience bullying and some-
times threats when they want to work and have income. A
woman who doesn’t work can’t even buy her own toiletries.
She waits for everything from her husband.^ [Women, KD,
Rural]. Another group said: BOur husbands are authoritarian.

774

J Fam Viol (2019) 34:769–780

They prevent us from going out. They think we just need to
give ourselves food and drink ... we need other things for our
fulfillment: communication, harmony^ [Women, SL, Rural].
Men and women’s groups both described enforced financial
dependency as a measure of security against wives
abandoning their husband. Men fear that if their wives were
able to access a certain level of financial independence she
would no longer need her husband to provide for her, thereby
opening opportunities for her to leave her current husband to
seek a spouse of higher social and economic status in the
community. If, however, she is totally dependent on her hus-
band, she would not be able to survive independently of him.
Yet women’s continually unsatisfied financial needs further
provoked the fear of their infidelity or actual instances of
infidelity, which subsequently triggers men’s jealousy and re-
peats the retaliatory tactics reciprocated between spouses. One
male discussion group acknowledged the emotional toll that
financial dependency and restrictive gender norms take on
women: BThe confinement of women at home due to her social
role while she doesn’t have the right to work makes certain
women suffer^ [Men, MT, Rural].

When discussing causes of emotional violence in the root
cause-consequence group activity, men and women both
spoke of the cultural concept of endurance and suffering:
BWe endure emotional violence for the future of our children,
so that our children will be blessed in spite of us^ [Women,
KL, Rural]. Enduring violence is rationalized as an abstract
investment for the eventual blessing of their children later in
life; violence is normalized. According to group consensus
across study regions, women are expected to tolerate and en-
dure emotionally violent behaviors for the eventual blessing of
their children later in life.

Physical Violence Like emotional violence, women’s first ex-
periences with physical violence (PV) often began early in life
through female genital cutting or forced marriage. Men and
women’s groups described using PV to coerce young girls
who attempt to refuse an arranged marriage to accept the mar-
riage, such as lashings with a tree branch or other forms of
beating.

In adulthood, most men and women’s groups in rural and
urban settings made a clear distinction between two levels of
PV—acceptable and unacceptable—unequivocally directed
toward women. Acceptable forms of PV were described as
those which do not cause any visible blemish or debilitating
injury and were not severe enough to be reported. Day-to-day
acceptable PV was considered by men and women not as an
abuse but an appropriate disciplinary measure to correct
women’s perceived disobedience, as described in the follow-
ing examples from both men and women: BBeating [your]
wife is normal, it is to put her back on the right path ... but
without hurting her^ [Men, TB, Urban]. BIt’s normal to be
beaten …^ [Women, MT, Urban].

Unacceptable PV was considered as violent, causing visi-
ble or injurious harm. While most men’s and women’s groups
in both urban and rural settings described unacceptable PV as
appropriate to be reported to authorities, several other urban
and rural women’s groups asserted that women should not
report the father of their children to the police under any cir-
cumstances. Instead, instances of unacceptable PV would be
mediated among family members or neighbors. Several
women’s groups again evoked the concept of ‘endurance’ as
a necessary cost of maintaining the household.

Catalysts for both levels of PV largely overlapped between
urban and rural groups of men and women. Notions of
women’s disobedience and insubordination were expressed
by all groups. Men and women cited leaving the house with-
out a husband’s approval, forgetting to pray, refusing sex, and
general disrespect as acceptable reasons to commit PV.
Women further elaborated that serving meals late or returning
home late from market may provoke PV. One urban men’s
group offered the justification that since husbands are finan-
cially responsible for their wife/wives, the husband possesses
the right to correct their wife’s disobedience as they see fit: BI
hit her. It’s normal. I have the right. I’m the man and I decide
when she oversteps [her bounds]. I correct her^ [Men, SD,
Urban]. Not a single group mentioned a situation in which a
woman could commit PV against her husband.

Despite the occurrence of locally acceptable and unaccept-
able PV against women described in group activities, many
groups discussed factors that have decreased such instances.
Men and women in both urban and rural settings cited the
decline of forced marriages and the increased frequency of
love marriages as responsible for the decrease of PV among
young couples. Several groups also cited the role of news
media, law, and education as means by which women and
girls are educated of their rights and protection by law.
However, two women’s groups described how if a woman
wishes to report PV to law enforcement agents, she must first
obtain evidence of PV from health professionals: BBattered
women go without hesitation to the hospital to seek a medical
certificate that they will file with the police to file a complaint^
[Women, KL, Rural]. Some men’s groups expressed their fear
of imprisonment or fines as reasons to stop committing PV
against their wives. The use of PV was described by one men’s
group as a sign of weakness that should not be tolerated in the
community. Other men’s and women’s groups described how
communication between spouses was more effective than PV
to mediate disputes, with one rural women’s group adding that
men who communicate better beat their wives less.

Sexual Violence Overwhelmingly, groups cited instances of
rape or molestation as taking place within the household and
committed by family members or other regular co-habitants. It
was not clear whether sexual violence within households was
continual throughout women’s life course or whether

J Fam Viol (2019) 34:769–780

775

instances of sexual violence were random. The second most
common description of sexual violence elicited from group
activities in both urban and rural settings, referred to the act
of men who are external to the household that jump over the
wall that separates housing compounds to rape or molest
sleeping women and girls (djiebbagool in the Wolof lan-
guage). One women’s group described how sleeping on a
mattress outside during the hot season exposes women to
djiebbagool, while one male and one female group both re-
ported anecdotes of men entering women’s bedrooms through
open, unlocked windows, at night.

The descriptive profile of sexual abusers discussed within
groups was roughly similar in its diversity across regions.
Men and women said that husbands whose sexual advances
were refused might rape their wives, while one men’s group
reported that rape in polygamous households was rare because
if one wife refused sex another would accept. Unmarried men
without girlfriends were thought to lack the means to pay for
prostitution, and therefore resorted to rape. Adolescent men
were described as having desires and fantasies they cannot
control that they subsequently expressed through sexual vio-
lence. Teachers were reported to coerce sex from young stu-
dents or otherwise molest them in private. Motorcycle taxi
drivers were reported to feign driving female clients to their
destinations to instead drive them to a secluded location to
rape them. Friends and acquaintances were reported to put
drugs in women’s drinks at clubs or dances to sexually assault
them later. Many groups blamed current television program-
ming as pornographic and being responsible for the deteriora-
tion of cultural values, thus encouraging young men’s ‘curi-
osity’, as it was described by one women’s group, to rape or
molest.

The profile of victims of sexual violence was invariably
women or young girls. Young girls were thought to be too
young to understand what was happening to them or too
inhibited by gendered social expectations to report the viola-
tion. If a rape or molestation that occurred within the house-
hold was discovered, it is was said to be rarely brought before
the police or made public outside the family or families im-
mediately involved. Participants frequently used the verb ‘to
camouflage’ or other clever euphemisms about mediating
within-household rape and molestation: BDirty laundry gets
washed within the family^ [Men, TB, Urban].

To have been raped at a young age was described by one
women’s group as a stigmatized reputation in their community
that follows them throughout their life. One men’s group de-
scribed how the eventual bride price that parents can negotiate
for their daughter would be reduced if it was known she had
previously been victim to rape. Parents therefore have both
social and economic incentive to deny instances of sexual
violence committed against their daughters.

By contrast to the majority of groups, several groups from
different regions described how rape was rare in their

communities because of prompt reporting to authorities and
severe sanctions. Group participants described a community
obligation to report rapists to the police, but also mentioned
how this reporting could be performed anonymously. This
group did not discuss public denunciations of sexual violence.

Patterns of Violence Between Spouses
and Their Interrelatedness

Here we weave community accounts of violence into an over-
all interpretation of their interrelatedness. The point of depar-
ture appears to be emotional violence, which was interpreted
through examples of economic considerations and financial
dependency. Economic violence emerged as a cross-cutting
factor in all forms of violence explored in our study.

Husbands cannot or choose not to adequately provide for
their wives yet refuse to allow their wives to earn an indepen-
dent income. The wife, being completely dependent on her
husband, feels powerless. When she demands money for per-
sonal and household expenses, her husband—who cannot or
chooses not to provide—interprets her demands to be vindic-
tive attacks to expose his inadequacies as the head of his
household relative to other men. The wife uses verbal abuse,
disrespect, and the refusal of sex to demonstrate her frustration
and to retaliate against her husband. In response, the husband
initiates his own retaliatory strategies of emotional and finan-
cial neglect. The neglected wife feels abandoned and suffers
material deprivation. Gender norms as described in our data
dictate that the wife should find solace in ‘endurance’ and
‘suffering’ through the violence, yet she must still acquire
financial resources from somewhere, which further provokes
men’s jealousy and mistrust. The men, in retaliation, further
deny resources to deliberately inflict harm or court new girl-
friends, while women again refuse sex or use verbal abuse
against her husband. Such cycles of reciprocal transgressions
then escalate to acceptable and unacceptable PV: BWhen a
man beats his wife, it is a deep, uncontrollable impulse. He
strikes to relieve his wounded pride to show his authority^
[Men, TB, Urban]. PV is a means by which men reclaim their
perceived authority or reclaim respect they feel they’ve lost
after experiencing their definition of an emotional abuse: hurt
pride by their wife.

According to our community groups, more financial con-
siderations linked forced marriage to physical and emotional
violence. Under conditions of poverty, parents experience fi-
nancial pressures to marry their daughter off at a young age
without her consent. Daughters were described as too young
to contribute to household expenses, yet they consume house-
hold resources. Many girls faced with a forced marriage were
reported to threaten suicide or experience depression.
Attempts to refuse the marriage justified physical violence as
a means to coerce the child’s submission. Young girls were
also described as a financial risk in that sexual activity could

776

J Fam Viol (2019) 34:769–780

result in a pregnancy outside of marriage, which carries a
double burden: immediately, the newborn constitutes an addi-
tional financial burden incurred by the male head of the house-
hold, further stressing minimal household finances; later, the
bride-price that a family can negotiate for their daughter is
reduced. Bride-price in cases where daughters are raped but
do not become pregnant could also be reduced, further dis-
couraging reporting sexual violence to authorities while also
maintaining a climate where perpetrators could perceive cul-
tural permissiveness to commit sexual violence. Thus, parents
factor the risk of future profits lost in the event of an out-of-
wedlock pregnancy. The financial stress cycles back into mar-
ital conflict and fuels the violence described above while also
exposing daughters to physical and emotional violence.

Positive Community Influencers Against Violence

Emotional Violence Religious leaders, specifically imams, and
village or neighborhood chiefs were most frequently identi-
fied as influential mediators for emotional violence in the ma-
jority of group contexts. One group elaborated that since mar-
riages were officiated at the mosque, Imams were well posi-
tioned to intervene in marital conflict. However, some men’s
and women’s groups discussed that an imam would only ad-
vise the couple to seek mediation within their family and re-
turn the couple back to where the problem originated.
Likewise, a village or neighborhood chief might offer ineffec-
tual mediation because they are rarely intimately involved in
individual household affairs. Family, friends, and neighbors
were highly ranked because they interact regularly with the
couple and can therefore counsel or intervene with each
spouse individually or as a couple. Several groups also sug-
gested the facilitation of couple’s communication, either
through counselling or education programs provided by the
government or non-governmental organizations. By contrast,
two men’s groups suggested the government should reinforce
men’s authority in society and at the center of the family,
blaming the government for destabilizing relationships
through women’s empowerment. These groups previously de-
scribed the negative impact of emotional violence on men and
women and relationships, yet still advocate for government-
supported gender inequality.

Physical Violence Outside mediation from religious leaders or
village or neighborhood chiefs, or visits by community health
workers were thought to be necessary to facilitate communi-
cation between couples to reduce PV. Other groups believed
that only the family could prevent PV. The brothers of a vio-
lent husband were identified as being highly influential to
intervene on behalf of an abused wife. One group explained
that in Senegal it is considered shameful to commit abuse in
front of younger brothers living in the same household. The
wife’s parents were also identified as exerting influence over

the behavior of a violent husband. One urban male group
further described that husbands want to be on amicable terms
with their in-laws, so reinforcing communication and media-
tion strategies of the parents of married women to intervene on
behalf of their daughters could help decrease PV. The police
were believed to be ineffectual because to report physical
violence women are required to present medical documenta-
tion. Other groups also thought that policy and the threat of
harsh judicial sanctions would instill preventative fear in men.

Sexual Violence A male group said that victims themselves
would be instrumental in decreasing instances of rape if they
were better supported to report their cases. Another male
group previously described that young girls are easily victim-
ized precisely because they are pressured not to speak about
their male abusers. Thus, reporting sexual violence is unlikely
to occur without other support. Non-governmental organiza-
tions were ranked highly in this regard. Several rural groups of
both men and women directly or indirectly referenced current
programs in their regions that promote women’s agency and
gender equality. Other men’s groups said that instances of rape
would decrease considerably if the government could enforce
the law or impose harsher sanctions. A women’s group sug-
gested that the government should enlist the help of village
chiefs to amplify the denunciation of rape. Older members of
the household were ranked by various groups as being less
influential or having no influence in stopping sexual violence,
perhaps reflective of the elevated reported occurrence of rape
and molestation occurring within households, as reported
under the first objective.

Discussion

Gender-based violence is associated with an array of negative
health outcomes for women and limits their opportunities to
fully participate in society. Only recently have studies begun
to explore the interconnectedness of emotional, physical and
sexual gender-based violence and their dynamic interplay be-
tween spouses. This qualitative study sought to understand
how men and women in Senegal perceive various forms of
gender-based violence, their connections, and who communi-
ty members believe could best promote change among perpe-
trators of violence. Group descriptions of emotional violence
centered around home finances, neglect, and dependency.
Emotional violence between male and female spouses esca-
lates to physically and sexually violent behaviors, uniquely
directed at women and girls. Physical violence was described
in two levels: acceptable, which does not cause visible or
injurious harm and unacceptable, which causes visible blem-
ish or injury. Sexual violence was described as common with-
in households but unreported. While group activities in this
study did not explicitly ask about economic violence, our

J Fam Viol (2019) 34:769–780

777

analysis identified themes of economic violence as cross-
cutting factors from men’s and women’s perspectives.

Economic violence toward women is characterized by male
partners who maintain absolute control over finances, who
withhold financial resources or refuse to contribute financially
to their female partner, thereby reducing women to total depen-
dency to satisfy their most basic needs and fulfillment. In this
present study, women clearly described emotional violence in
terms of their absolute financial dependency on their husbands
and their exclusion from income generating opportunities, re-
sultant to gendered norms enforced by their husbands and con-
doned by society. Other studies in sub-Saharan Africa have
shown how women whose husbands prohibited them from
working accepted their dependency as a natural and fatalistic
condition (Fawole 2008; Fawole et al. 2005). The women in
our study similarly normalized their own suffering through the
cultural concept of ‘endurance’ and ‘suffering’. Perhaps their
resignation to endure violence is a consequence of having no
realistically imaginable life alternatives, conditioned through
an environment of dependency and control. Within the context
of marital dependency theory, women who are economically
dependent on their partner are at greater risk of violence be-
cause they cannot easily leave or negotiate change (Kalmuss
and Straus 1982; Tolman and Wang 2005). Thus, programs that
aim to increase women’s access to economic resources and
men’s tolerance of it, may facilitate women’s bargaining for a
better situation or to leave a violent relationship altogether
without the fear of destitution. By refusing their wives the right
to earn an income, men implicitly assume sole responsibility
for providing for their family, but due to conditions of poverty
and lack of local employment, many well-intentioned husbands
are still unable to earn enough of an income to adequately
provide for their family. Programs that combine men’s in-
creased access to financial resources with gender transforma-
tive education may alleviate financial burdens in the household
more generally, thereby increasing disposable income and hus-
bands’ willingness or ability to share with their spouse.

Women in this study just as frequently as men believed that
spousal disobedience ought to be corrected with physical vi-
olence. It was shown elsewhere that women who hold tolerant
attitudes to GBV will experience GBV to a higher degree than
their intolerant peers, after controlling for demographic, social
and empowerment indicators (Faramarzi et al. 2005). In an-
other study analyzing Demographic and Health Survey data
from 17 countries in sub-Saharan Africa, women were 34%
more likely to justify GBV than men (Uthman et al. 2009).
Furthermore, the association between poverty and attitudes
toward GBV was found to be stronger among women than
among men. Neighborhood poverty and entrenched gender
norms in Senegal will likely continue to expose women and
girls to high risk of GBV generation after generation, unless
global and local availability of wealth are shifted more equi-
tably to alleviate poverty-susceptible harmful social norms.

In our study, child marriage was linked to all forms of GBV
through financial considerations within households. A recent
randomized controlled trial in Bangladesh challenged the con-
cept that empowerment training alone can reduce child mar-
riage (Buchmann et al. 2017). Instead, financial incentives
conditional on delaying the age of marriage reduced the like-
lihood of early marriage by 25% and prolonged educational
attainment for young girls more than either the empowerment
program alone, which had no effect on marriage timing, or a
combination of the two. If a similar impact could be achieved
in Senegal, girls’ first experiences with physical, sexual, and
emotional GBV could be prevented, diminished, or at least
delayed until they are more emotionally and physically
equipped to defend themselves. These girls may then be more
likely to break the cycles of violence with their own children.
Community leaders commonly drawn upon by health pro-
motion projects, such as religious leaders or village chiefs,
received mixed reviews regarding their ability to intervene
in the various forms of violence. Participants in this study
recognized law and policy to be helpful against GBV, yet
largely insufficient. Given that gender discrimination simulta-
neously intersects several domains of life (i.e. education,
health, employment, etc.) single-focus interventions will not
likely inspire systemic or societal change. Nor will interven-
tions that exclude men from learning about women’s empow-
erment and their contribution to women’s disempowerment.
For example, Papa et al. (2000) used feminist theories to in-
crease women’s empowerment among female dairy farmers in
India, without including husbands in the program (Papa et al.
2000). While the qualitative evaluation documented both
women’s and men’s reports of increased household decision-
making, improved health care seeking behaviors, and im-
proved financial independence, the evaluation also document-
ed numerous examples of either no status change or disem-
powerment of women in response to the program. Patriarchy
still controlled the women’s lives at home and in their com-
munities outside of the program. More recently, a cluster ran-
domized controlled trial in India evaluated a gender equity and
family planning counseling intervention, that included male
partners (Raj et al. 2016). Health care providers engaged men
alone and then with their wives on gender equity and docu-
mented significantly reduced reports of sexual violence in
married couples as compared to the control group. Evidence
supports the inclusion of both partners in counselling more
than one spouse alone, and our work contributes to the under-
standing of how men’s and women’s experiences with vio-
lence relate to each other. Future programming should evalu-
ate whether excluding male partners from outreach and edu-
cation efforts is appropriate.

Participants in our study frequently identified facili-
tated discussion or counseling to improve couples’ com-
munication skills as desirable programmatic interventions.
Communication-based strategies have emerged more

778

J Fam Viol (2019) 34:769–780

generally as participatory tools that can reframe social
practices and gender norms to explore their unintended
consequences and expand dialogue around locally sensitive
themes. The work of Underwood et al. (2011) and the Africa
Transformation (AT) program aimed to reconstruct gender
norms in Tanzania, Uganda, and Zambia by engaging both
men and women in mutual dialogue (Underwood et al.
2011). AT produced a series of narrative videos that highlight-
ed community role models who occupied non-traditional gen-
der roles in their own lives or who displayed atypically posi-
tive behaviors and attitudes toward women. Male and female
participants were then supported through interactive, facilitat-
ed discussions to critique established gender norms and iden-
tify inequality and its impact in relation to their own lives and
community values. A combination of gender-inclusive cou-
ple’s communication interventions with a more localized use
of film is a promising strategy to address social and gender
norms. Whether short film with facilitated group discussions
is more effective than mass media will be an interesting area of
research moving forward.

An interesting topic outside the scope of our research
objectives that we would like to explore in the future is
what constitutes a ‘harmonious’ relationship. Identifying,
interviewing, and promoting couples who say they have a
harmonious relationship would demonstrate locally relevant
models of alternatives to violence that could be used in the
same cultural context.

Strengths and Limitations

Our work builds on the emerging interest of inter-connections
between forms of violence from both men’s and women’s
perspectives. The qualitative technique adapted from the
Participatory Learning and Action strategy fostered an envi-
ronment within which community members could more freely
discuss sensitive topics around violence that may have been
difficult to achieve through one-on-one interviews or more
formal focus group discussions. Nevertheless, there were sev-
eral design and methodological limitations related to our
study.

First, the breadth and scope of the project as per funding
requirements, did not allow for deeper investigations into
emergent theory and related constructs or sub-constructs. For
example, our approach was not able to distinguish between
what determines the use of acceptable or unacceptable phys-
ical violence. Untangling a rationale for these subtle distinc-
tions could better inform behavioral and communication pro-
grams to reframe all physical violence as unacceptable.
Secondly, due to time constraints and the scale of the research
we elected to use a very structured approach, using group
activities designed to reach a consensus among participants.
As a result, identifying and reporting dissenting and minority
opinions within groups was limited by the nature of the data

collection method itself. In-depth interviews or formal focus
groups would have allowed for a more nuanced exploration of
a diversity of opinions that group consensus may have
masked. In addition, using an ‘expanded notes’ approach –
while efficient and accurate – did not produce detailed tran-
scriptions that would have permitted more use of verbatim
quotes, and perhaps greater depth, in our analysis.

Conclusion

Economic violence cross-cut community accounts of physi-
cal, sexual, and emotional gender-based violence but no com-
prehensive solutions were identified that could stop or signif-
icantly reduce instances of GBV. Without sincere acknowl-
edgement at the highest levels of how current global capital-
ism maintains conditions of poverty throughout the world, the
collision of gender, violence, and related poor health out-
comes will continue to outpace well-intentioned health and
development efforts.

References

Abrahams, N., Devries, K., Watts, C., Pallitto, C., Petzold, M., Shamu, S.,
& García-Moreno, C. (2014). Worldwide prevalence of non-partner
sexual violence: A systematic review. The Lancet, 383(9929), 1648–
1654. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(13)62243-6.

Abramsky, T., Watts, C. H., Garcia-Moreno, C., Devries, K., Kiss, L.,
Ellsberg, M., Jansen, H. A. F. M., & Heise, L. (2011). What factors
are associated with recent intimate partner violence? Findings from
the WHO multi-country study on women’s health and domestic
violence. BMC Public Health, 11(109). https://doi.org/10.1186/
1471-2458-11-109.

Appel, K., Buckingham, E., Jodoin, K., Roth, D. (2012). Participatory
learning and action toolkit: For application in BSR’s global
programs.

Buchmann, N., Field, E., Glennerster, R., Nazneen, S., Pimkina, S., Sen,
I., … Bhaskar, M. (2017). Power vs money: Alternative approaches
to reducing child marriage in Bangladesh, a randomized control
trial. Retrieved from https://www.povertyactionlab.org/sites/
default/files/publications/100_child-marriage-bangladesh-Apr2017.
pdf. Accessed 8 April, 2019.

Campbell, J. C. (2002). Health consequences of intimate partner violence.
The Lancet, 359(9314), 1331–1336. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-
6736(02)08336-8.

Chiang, L., Howard, A., Gleckel, J., Ogoti, C., Karlsson, J., Hynes, M., &
Mwangi, M. (2018). Cycle of violence among young Kenyan wom-
en: The link between childhood violence and adult physical intimate
partner violence in a population-based survey. Child Abuse &
Neglect, 84, 45–52. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chiabu.2018.07.010.

Devries, K. M., Mak, J. Y., Bacchus, L. J., Child, J. C., Falder, G.,
Petzold, M., … Watts, C. H. (2013). Intimate partner violence and
incident depressive symptoms and suicide attempts: A systematic
review of longitudinal studies. PLoS Medicine, 10, e1001439.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001439

DHS. (2012). Enquête Démographique et de Santé à Indicateurs
Multiples Sénégal (EDS-MICS) 2010–2011. Claverton, Maryland,

J Fam Viol (2019) 34:769–780

779

USA: Agence Nationale de la Statistique et de la Démographie -
ANSD/Sénégal and ICF International. Retrieved from http://
dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/FR258/FR258.pdf. Accessed 8 April
2019.

Durevall, D., & Lindskog, A. (2015). Intimate partner violence and HIV
in ten sub-Saharan African countries: What do the demographic and
health surveys tell us? The Lancet Global Health, 3(1), e34–e43.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S2214-109X(14)70343-2.

Ellsberg, M., & Emmelin, M. (2014). Intimate partner violence
and mental health. Global Health Action, 7. https://doi.org/
10.3402/gha.v7.25658.

Ellsberg, M., Jansen, H. A., Heise, L., Watts, C. H., & Garcia-Moreno, C.
(2008). Intimate partner violence and women’s physical and mental
health in the WHO multi-country study on women’s health and
domestic violence: An observational study. The Lancet,
371(9619), 1165–1172. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(08)
60522-X.

Faramarzi, M., Esmailzadeh, S., & Mosavi, S. (2005). A comparison of
abused and non-abused women’s definitions of domestic violence
and attitudes to acceptance of male dominance. European Journal of
Obstetrics and Gynecology and Reproductive Biology, 122(2), 225–
231. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejogrb.2004.11.047 .

Fawole, O. I. (2008). Economic violence to women and girls: Is it receiv-
ing the necessary attention? Trauma, Violence, & Abuse, 9(3), 167–
177. https://doi.org/10.1177/1524838008319255.

Fawole, O. I., Ajuwon, A. J., & Osungbade, K. O. (2005). Evaluation of
interventions to prevent gender-based violence among young female
apprentices in Ibadan, Nigeria. Health Education, 105(3), 186–203.
https://doi.org/10.1108/09654280510595254.

Fleming, P. J., Gruskin, S., Rojo, F., & Dworkin, S. L. (2015a). Men’s
v i o l e n c e a g ai n s t w o m e n a n d m e n a r e i n t e r- r e l a t e d :
Recommendations for simultaneous intervention. Social Science &
Medicine (1982), 146, 249–256. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
socscimed.2015.10.021.

Fleming, P. J., McCleary-Sills, J., Morton, M., Levtov, R., Heilman, B., &
Barker, G. (2015b). Risk factors for men’s lifetime perpetration of
physical violence against intimate partners: Results from the inter-
national men and gender equality survey (IMAGES) in eight coun-
tries. PLoS One, 10(3), e0118639. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.
1371/journal.pone.0118639

Fry, D. A., & Elliott, S. P. (2017). Understanding the linkages between
violence against women and violence against children. The Lancet,
5, e472–e473 Retrieved from https://ac.els-cdn.com/
S2214109X17301535/1-s2.0-S2214109X17301535-main.pdf?_
tid=f2b34032-11aa-11e8-ad19-00000aab0f26&acdnat=
1518628835_ae0b9dd54bb480bd31a70beceff14e81 . Accessed 8
April 2019.

Fulu, E., Miedema, S., Roselli, T., McCook, S., Chan, K. L., Haardörfer,
R., Jewkes, R., Fulu, E., Jewkes, R., Warner, X., Miedema, S.,
Roselli, T., Lang, J., Naved, R. T., Huque, H., Farah, S., Shuvra,
M. M. R., Erken, A., Xiangxian, W., Gang, F., Hongtao, L.,
Mudrovcic, Z., Hua, W., Hoekman, A., Nikulainen, E., Coquelin,
B., Khan, M., Kusuma, W., Manero, C. M., Larsen, F., Fulu, E.,
Warner, X., Moussavi, S., de Mel, N., Peiris, P., Gomez, S., Team,
S. I., Jinadasa, K., Jewkes, R., Sikweyiya, Y., Shai, N., Drapuluvik-
Tinabar, F., Magoola, P., Agyenta, A., Shanahan, T., Vienings, T.,
Jewkes, R., Garcia-Moreno, C., Naved, R. T., Jinadasa, K.,
Vienings, T., Kusuma, W., Jewkes, R., Connell, R., Barker, G.,
Greig, A., Roy, R., Verma, R., Sen, K. M., & Johnson, S. (2017).
Pathways between childhood trauma, intimate partner violence, and
harsh parenting: Findings from the UN multi-country study on men
and violence in Asia and the Pacific. The Lancet Global Health,
5(5), e512–e522. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2214-109X(17)30103-1.
Garcia-Moreno, C., Jansen, H. A., Ellsberg, M., Heise, L., & Watts, C. H.
(2006). Prevalence of intimate partner violence: Findings from the
WHO multi-country study on women’s health and domestic

violence. The Lancet, 368(9543), 1260–1269. https://doi.org/10.
1016/S0140-6736(06)69523-8.

Guedes, A., Bott, S., Garcia-Moreno, C., & Colombini, M. (2016).
Bridging the gaps: A global review of intersections of violence
against women and violence against children. Global Health
Action, 9. https://doi.org/10.3402/gha.v9.31516.

Halcomb, E. J., & Davidson, P. M. (2006). Is verbatim transcription of
interview data always necessary? Applied Nursing Research, 19(1),
38–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.APNR.2005.06.001.

Heise, L. L. (2011). What works to prevent partner violence? An evidence
overview (version 2.0). London: Retrieved from https://www.oecd.
org/derec/49872444.pdf . Accessed 8 April 2019.

Hillis, S., Mercy, J., Amobi, A., & Kress, H. (2016). Global prevalence of
past-year violence against children: A systematic review and mini-
mum estimates. Pediatrics. Retrieved from http://pediatrics.
aappublications.org/content/early/2016/01/25/peds.2015-4079.
abstract , 137, e20154079. Accessed 8 April 2019.

Jewkes, R. (2002). Intimate partner violence: Causes and prevention. The
Lancet, 359(9315), 1423–1429. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-
6736(02)08357-5.

Kalmuss, D. S., & Straus, M. A. (1982). Wife’s marital dependency and
wife abuse. Journal of Marriage and Family, 44(2), 277–286.
https://doi.org/10.2307/351538.

Kayibanda, J. F., Bitera, R., & Alary, M. (2012). Violence toward women,
men’s sexual risk factors, and HIV infection among women:
Findings from a National Household Survey in Rwanda. JAIDS
Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes, 59(3).
Retrieved from https://journals.lww.com/jaids/Fulltext/2012/
03010/Violence_Toward_Women,_Men_s_Sexual_Risk_Factors,.
12.aspx ), 300–307. Accessed 8 April 2019.

Kishor, S., & Bradley, S. E. K. (2012). Women’s and men’s experience of
spousal violence in two African countries: Does gender matter? .
DHS Analytical Studies No. 27 . Calverton, Maryland: ICF
International . Retrieved from http://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/
AS27/AS27.pdf. Accessed 8 April 2019. . Accessed 8 April 2019.
Lansford, J. E., & Deater-Deckard, K. (2012). Childrearing discipline and
violence in developing countries. Child Development, 83(1), 62–75.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8624.2011.01676.x.

Ludermir, A. B., Schraiber, L. B., D’Oliveira, A. F. P. L., França-Junior,
I., & Jansen, H. A. (2008). Violence against women by their intimate
partner and common mental disorders. Social Science & Medicine,
66(4), 1008–1018. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.SOCSCIMED.2007.
10.021.

MacQuarrie, K., Winter, R., & Kishor, S. (2014). Spousal violence in sub-
Saharan Africa: Structure, forms, and levels. https://doi.org/10.
13140/2.1.2810.7522.

Maxwell, L., Devries, K., Zionts, D., Alhusen, J. L., & Campbell, J.
(2015). Estimating the effect of intimate partner violence on
women’s use of contraception: A systematic review and meta-anal-
ysis. PLoS One, 10, e0118234. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.
0118234.

Mayoux, L. (2005). Participatory action learning system (PALS): Impact
assessment for civil society development and grassroots-based ad-
vocacy in Anandi, India. Journal of International Development,
17(2), 211–242. https://doi.org/10.1002/jid.1211.

Michau, L., Horn, J., Bank, A, Dutt, M., & Zimmerman, C. (2015).
Prevention of violence against women and girls: Lessons from prac-
tice. The Lancet, 385(9978), 1672–1684. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0140-6736(14)61797-9.

Namy, S., Carlson, C., Norcini Pala, A., Faris, D., Knight, L., Allen, E.,
Devries, K., & Naker, D. (2017). Gender, violence and resilience
among Ugandan adolescents. Child Abuse & Neglect, 70, 303–314.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chiabu.2017.06.015.

Papa, M. J., Singhal, A., Ghanekar, D. V., & Papa, W. H. (2000).
Organizing for social change through cooperative action.

780

J Fam Viol (2019) 34:769–780

Communication Theory, 10(1), 90–123. Retrieved from.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2885.2000.tb00181.x.

Raj, A., Ghule, M., Ritter, J., Battala, M., Gajanan, V., Nair, S., Dasgupta, A.,
Silverman, J. G., Balaiah, D., & Saggurti, N. (2016). Cluster random-
ized controlled trial evaluation of a gender equity and family planning
intervention for married men and couples in rural India. PLoS One,
11(5), e0153190. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0153190.

Silverman, J. G., & Raj, A. (2014). Intimate partner violence and repro-
ductive coercion: Global barriers to Women’s reproductive control.
PLoS Medicine, 11(9), e1001723. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pmed.1001723.

Thorne, S. E. (2008). Interpretive description. Walnut Creek: Left

Coast Press.

Tolman, R. M., & Wang, H. C. (2005). Domestic violence and women’s
employment: Fixed effects models of three waves of women’s em-
ployment study data. American Journal of Community Psychology,
36(1), 147–158. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10464-005-6239-0.

Tong, A., Sainsbury, P., & Craig, J. (2008). Consolidated criteria for
reporting qualitative research (COREQ): A 32-item checklist for in-
terviews and focus groups. International Journal for Quality in Health
Care : Journal of the International Society for Quality in Health Care
/ ISQua, 19, 349–357. https://doi.org/10.1093/intqhc/mzm042.

Underwood, C., Brown, J., Sherard, D., Tushabe, B., & Abdur-Rahman,
A. (2011). Reconstructing gender norms through ritual

communication: A study of African transformation. Journal of
Communication, 61, 197–218. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1460-2466.
2011.01537.x.

UNDP. (2018). International human development

indicators.
Retrieved March 12, 2018, from http://hdr.undp.org/en/
countries/profiles/SEN.

Uthman, O. A., Moradi, T., & Lawoko, S. (2009). The independent con-
tribution of individual-, neighbourhood-, and country-level socio-
economic position on attitudes towards intimate partner violence
against women in sub-Saharan Africa: A multilevel model of direct
and moderating effects. Social Science & Medicine, 68(10), 1801–
1809. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.SOCSCIMED.2009.02.045.

Vyas, S., & Watts, C. (2009). How does economic empowerment
affect women’s risk of intimate partner violence in low and
middle income countries? A systematic review of published
evidence. Journal of International Development, 21(5), 577–
602. https://doi.org/10.1002/jid.1500.

WHO. (2013). Global and regional estimates of violence against women:
Prevalence and health effects of intimate partner and non-partner
sexual violence. Geneva.

Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

