www.elsevier.com/locate/worlddev

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2012.12.018

The Eﬀect of Women’s Bargaining Power on Child Nutrition

World Development Vol. 45, pp. 17–30, 2013
Ó 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
0305-750X/$ - see front matter

in Rural Senegal

AURE´ LIA LE´ PINE

University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand

and

ERIC STROBL *

Ecole Polytechnique, Paris, France
Ipag Research Lab, Paris, France

Summary. — We examine how women’s bargaining power aﬀects child nutritional status using data from rural Senegal. In order to cor-
rect for the potential endogeneity of women’s bargaining power we use information on a mother’s ethnicity relative to that of the com-
munity she resides in order to construct an arguably exogenous exclusion restriction. While standard OLS estimates suggest that if a
mother has more bargaining power, her children will have a better nutritional status, our IV estimates indicate that the true impact
is underestimated if the endogeneity of bargaining power is not taken into account.
Ó 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Key words — woman’s bargaining power, child nutrition, instrumental variable, Senegal, Africa

1. INTRODUCTION

Since the Beijing conference on women in 1995 the increase
in women’s relative to men’s power in the household, usually
known as women’s bargaining power, has become a primary
policy goal in developing countries. This willingness to em-
power women in developing countries is based on the idea that
social justice is an important aspect of human welfare and has
been reinforced by the ﬁnding that an increase in women’s
power relative to men’s confers beneﬁts on child health
(Ahmed, 2006; Duﬂo, 2003; Hoddinott & Haddad, 1991;
Lundberg, Pollak, & Wales, 1997; Maitra, 2004; Quisumbing
& Maluccio, 2000; Thomas, Contreras, & Frankenberg,
1999). Such a link is generally explained by several factors.
First, as stated in Smith, Ramakrishnan, Ndiaye, Haddad,
and Martorell (2003), women are the main caretakers of chil-
dren, and the quality of caring practices for children is one of
the three key determinants of their nutritional status, the other
two being household food security and health environment.
Women’s power to make decisions in this domain thus has a
direct impact on child nutrition. Second, women’s power has
an indirect eﬀect because it inﬂuences women’s own health
and nutritional status, both of which are vital for proper care
for children and, during pregnancy,
for children’s birth
weights. A third explanation that is valid in the absence of in-
come pooling relies on the fact that men and women have dis-
tinct income allocations: men tend to use a larger proportion
of income for production, household maintenance, social
investment and personal consumption, while women’s income
is used more to meet daily consumption, such as food, cloth-
ing, and health care (Blumberg, 1989; Lele, 1986).

Although, there is now a large literature indicating a positive
eﬀect of women’s bargaining power on child nutrition, much
of the existing studies suﬀer from two potentially important
weaknesses. Firstly, many studies rely on very indirect proxies
of female bargaining power. Indeed, an accurate measure of

women’s bargaining power is diﬃcult to obtain because of
its context-speciﬁcity, multidimensionality, and the diﬃculty
in measuring a “process” (Malhotra, Schuler, & Boender,
2002, Section 2). In this regard, commonly used proxies have
ranged from measures of woman’s economic possessions, such
as earned (Browning, Bourguignon, Chiappori, & Lechene,
1994) or unearned income (Schultz, 1990; Thomas, 1990),
inheritance (Quisumbing, 1994), assets brought into the mar-
riage (Thomas et al., 1999), and current assets (Quisumbing
& De La Briere, 2000). However, such measures are also likely
to capture other aspects of a household. For example,
earned income inherently also reﬂects labor supply decisions
(Lundberg & Pollak, 1996), while unearned income, such as
pensions, unemployment insurance, or interest on earnings
accumulated over the life cycle, is most likely related to past
or present household behavior (Behrman, 1997; Lundberg &
Pollak, 1996) and may depend on tastes and labor market
conditions (Quisumbing & Maluccio, 2000). Moreover, asset
ownership might be correlated with other household choices,
for instance, traditional households could at the same time
prevent women from owning assets and have less healthy
children (Behrman, Pollak, & Taubman, 1995 cited in;
Duﬂo, 2003). Finally, in the presence of assortative matching,
a woman’s asset level could aﬀect child health through her
spouse’s characteristics (Duﬂo, 2003). For these reasons,
more recent studies (Ahmed, 2006; Allendorf, 2007; Becker,

* Data collection was supported by the Microinsurance Innovation Faci-
lity of the International Labour Organization (Grant No. PO40052422).
We thank David Fielding, Murat Gencß, and Alexis Le Nestour from the
University of Otago as well as the three anonymous reviewers from World
Development for their excellent comments and suggestions. We also thank
Robert Johnston from UNICEF for providing the MUAC bracelets as
well as information on their use. Final revision accepted: December 19,
2012.

17

18

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

Fonseca-Becker, & Schenck-Yglesias, 2006; Elder & Rudolph,
2003; Friedberg & Webb, 2006; Hindin, 2000; Mullany,
Hindin, & Becker, 2005; Woldemicael, 2010) have relied on
“direct evidence of power” indicators (Kishor, 2000) that
capture the nature of decision-making or control of resources
by each spouse in the household. However, even when the re-
searcher uses such direct proxies, there might be measurement
error in women’s bargaining power that could result in an
attenuation bias. For instance, an important issue in correctly
measuring women’s bargaining power might be whether the
husband of a nonpowerful woman was present during the
interview and biased the responses of the woman.

The second major weakness in much of the existing literature is
the failure to take account of the potential endogeneity of women’s
bargaining power in econometrically estimating its eﬀect on child
health. More speciﬁcally, even in the case where direct measures
of women’s power in the household are available, these are likely
to be correlated with other unobservable (to the econometrician)
variables that aﬀect child health, and hence estimates of its eﬀect
may be biased. Of particular concern in this regard is unobserved
parenting ability of the spouses. For instance, one could argue that
women who have a greater bargaining power are likely to have bet-
ter intrinsic characteristics since they managed to achieve a greater
power in the household thanks to their good maternal skills, but that
these characteristics also result in greater health in their children. In
contrast, one could argue that in countries where social norms dic-
tate that males are the guarantors of the well being of the household
members and in this respect, are expected to make decisions for their
members, women who have a high bargaining power are more likely
to belong to deviant households. Indeed, a woman could have a
greater bargaining power as a result of the disengagement of
her husband in household’s decisions, that is, when the husband
does not invest his money and time toward his wife and his chil-
dren. In this situation we would observe that women who have
greater bargaining power have children who do worse. Thus the
endogeneity bias could, depending on the context, lead to an
over- or an under-estimation of the eﬀect of women’s bargaining
power on child nutrition. To the best of our knowledge this issue
has as of yet not been speciﬁcally examined.

In this paper we address these measurement and estimation
concerns using the case study of Senegal. The choice of Senegal
is motivated by a number of reasons. Firstly, chronic malnutri-
tion (stunting) and acute malnutrition (wasting) aﬀects 16% and
8% of the children under-5 and cause 31% of all deaths that oc-
cur among children under-5 (Demographic and Health Survey,
2006). Secondly, average Senegalese women’s relative decision-
making power is among the lowest in the world, well below the
South Asian average (Smith et al., 2003).

Our data set consists of a rich sample of 505 farming house-
holds located in the Saint Louis region of Senegal. These data
allow us to ﬁrstly, as do some of the more recent studies, focus
on direct measures of female power as speciﬁcally incorporated
in the questionnaire as shown in Appendix 1. To control for the
potential endogeneity of our bargaining power measure, we
take advantage of the fact that for historical reasons, women
of diﬀerent ethnicities have diﬀerent bargaining power inside
the household and that the extent of this may depend on the eth-
nicity of the neighborhood that they are living in, but that rela-
tive ethnicity, as we shall argue, is not directly related to
children’s nutritional status. Our econometric results indicate
that women’s bargaining power is a strong determinant of child
nutrition. An increase in one standard deviation of the women’s
bargaining power index improves the child Mid-Upper Arm
Circumference (MUAC) z-score by 0.81 standard deviations
after controlling for the endogeneity of women’s bargaining
power.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In the
following section we outline our theoretical framework. The
third section describes the Senegalese background, our data
and the construction of variables used in our estimation. In
Section 4, we outline our empirical speciﬁcation and describe
the econometric results of its estimation. Finally, concluding
remarks are contained in the last section.

2. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK

In order to demonstrate the potential importance of control-
ling for the endogeneity of bargaining power in estimating its
impact on child nutrition, we adapt to our context the non-
uniﬁed preferences framework that determines the eﬀect of a
mother’s bargaining power on child health as proposed by
Maitra (2004). Accordingly, changes in child health result
not only from a change in the budget constraint but also from
changes in the utility function due to relative changes in power
inside the household. It is assumed that parents i.e. the
mother(m) and the father(f) make decisions regarding the
quality of child health attainment. More speciﬁcally, consider
a general household’s utility maximization problem where the
two parents choose commodities purchased on the market (X)
and non-market goods (Z) to maximize the diﬀerence between
their utility level U and their reserve utility, (U*), the latter of
which represents the utility of each parent outside the union.
We assume that this reserve utility depends on factors that af-
fect bargaining power inside the union (u), and here for con-
venience sake deﬁned as the relative bargaining power of the
mother. The bargaining power itself depends on each spouse’s
characteristics (An = m, f), such as his/her ability on the labor
market
(productivity, occupation, educational attainment,
etc.), his/her social status, the wife’s rank in the household
in the context of polygamy, extra-household environmental
factors (E) that include marriage market characteristics, laws
(e.g., labor laws, property rights, and divorce law), and social
norms in the neighborhood, and a vector of prices (p) that is
assumed to proxy the prices in the area mainly the prices of
medical services and food. We also assume that bargaining
power may be inﬂuenced by other potentially unobserved
parental characteristics such as parenting ability, cn = m, f.
In this regard one might be inclined to expect that mothers
who have better intrinsic characteristics may be able to have
greater power as husbands may feel less urgency to interfere
in the child’s upbringing. However, in the Senegalese context
this is a priori not necessarily true since “women should be
submissive to male authority” (Sow, 1996). 1 Deviant, more
independent behavior on the part of the mother may thus be
associated with more bargaining power. Similarly, it might
be that household heads who do not seriously take their
socially expected role as guarantor of the well-being of the
household may also allow greater power to the woman. In
this case we would observe that children in those households
would have poorer access to food, poorer care, and a worse
health environment. Thus, a priori, the relationship between
good/bad parenting ability and bargaining power is not clear.

The two parents choose to maximize:

Max V ¼ ½U fðX ; ZÞ   U

fðAf ; E; p; cfÞ  ½U mðX ; ZÞ

  U

mðAm; E; p; cmÞ

ð1Þ
Subject to the full
income constraint pX = wmTm + wfTf,
where wn is the wage rate and Tn is the time endowment for
parent n. As a solution to this maximization problem, one ob-
tains a reduced form demand equation for child health (H),

THE EFFECT OF WOMEN’S BARGAINING POWER ON CHILD NUTRITION IN RURAL SENEGAL

19

which depends on prices (p), the household eﬃciency param-
eter (X), unobserved parenting ability of the spouses, cn, and
the factors determining bargaining power:
H ¼ HðAn; E; p; cn; XÞ
ð2Þ
Or alternatively, if one has some proxy of bargaining power:
H ¼ Hðp; cn; X; uÞ
ð3Þ
Note that we continue to allow for a direct eﬀect of parenting
ability on child health, not just through bargaining power. If
we also assume that child health may depend on exogenous
child characteristics (I), household and parental characteristics
(P), and community characteristics (S), then (3) can be rewrit-
ten as:
H ¼ Hðp; cn; X; u; I; P ; SÞ
ð4Þ
The important stumbling block in terms of estimating the true
causal eﬀect of bargaining power on child health from (4) is
the role of unobserved parenting ability, cn, which, as we as-
sume, determines the bargaining power of the woman as well
as child health. As noted earlier,
if greater female ability
means that the husband allows her greater power, then one
would expect an upward bias in terms of the estimated eﬀect
of female bargaining power. However, if husbands who do
not feel the pressure of being the dominant person in the
household also feel less obligation toward maintaining child’s
health, then one would expect a downward bias in terms of the
estimated eﬀect of female bargaining power. Thus this is an is-
sue to be resolved empirically.

3. DATA, VARIABLES, AND DESCRIPTIVE

STATISTICS

(a) Background

Senegal is a West African country with a population of
approximately 12 million of which 7 million live in rural areas.
According to the Demographic and Health Survey conducted
in 2005, child malnutrition appears to be a major health con-
cern as 16% of the children under-5 are stunted, 8% are
wasted, and 17% are underweight (Demographic & Health
Survey, 2006). The traditional Senegalese family is made of
a household head, his wives, and the children of his wives.
In the sample, 11.1% of the individuals are household heads
and 13% are household head spouses. About half of the sam-
ple is made up of children of the head of the household and
among these 2123 children, 745 are less than 5 years old.
Members who are not genetically aﬃliated to the household
can also be household members; it is the case of the fostered
children who represent 1.3% of the sample.

In the sample, 32% of married women have a co-wife.
Polygamy is socially organized in Senegal in order to reduce

conﬂicts and tensions within the household. In rural areas,
co-wives live under the same concession, but are autonomous
as each wife and her children have a space in the concession
called “ro` q” in Wolof. Each household is thus made up of sev-
eral wife–children nucleus and in order to reconstitute the
wife–children nucleus, children were matched to their mother.
Ro`q includes a personal kitchen and a small land area that is
used to cultivate food for breakfast. Co-wives however main-
tain social interactions; they eat together, do collective chores
and they keep company (Diop, 1985). The population in the
sample is divided into two main ethnic groups: 57% are Wolof,
40% are Fula while only 2% are Moorish. Fula people are
over-represented in the sample since they represent only 17%
of the population in Senegal while 40% of Senegalese are Wo-
lof. Wolof mainly live in the western part of Senegal, they are
mostly farmers who grow rice, millet, and groundnuts. Fula
are found essentially in Eastern Senegal; they are by tradition
pastoral nomads but many Fula have now settled permanently
in rural areas and live on agriculture. All of these ethnicities
are Muslim and most of the Muslims (96%) belong to the Tij-
anyyah Muslim brotherhood in the sample. Figure 1 shows
evidence that women’s decision-power in Senegal is particu-
larly low, since all the decisions except food based decisions
are commonly made by the husband alone, even those related
to wife outcomes.

(b) Data

We collected data within the context of the implementation of
a health insurance project
targeting farming households.
Thanks to the presence of the Senegal River allowing the prac-
tice of irrigated agriculture, a large share of the population lo-
cated in the Saint Louis region lives on agriculture. Our study
was conducted in Ross Be´thio, Gae¨, and Gue´de´, that is, three
rural communities of the Saint-Louis region. Most of the
110,000 inhabitants of these rural communities derive their live-
lihoods from subsistence farming, with an annual adult equiva-
lent 2 median household consumption expenditure of 848 USD,
of which on average 3.9% is spent on health. Note that in this area
18% of the children under-5 are mildly wasted (z-score <  1)
and 4% are moderately wasted (z-score <  2). The low malnu-
trition rate in the Saint Louis region has been highlighted in the
Enqueˆte Se´ne´galaise Aupre`s des Me´nages (Ministry of Econ-
omy, 2004) and may be explained by the lower poverty rate in
the Saint Louis region (Dramani, 2011). However, the ﬁnding
that women’s power is extremely low in Senegal may not vary
much between regions. Indeed, cultural factors determining
the low women’s power such as the prevalence of Muslims
and polygamy remain high and constant between and within
Senegalese regions. In order to know how ﬁndings could be ex-
tended to regions with diﬀerent levels of malnutrition, the paper
looks if the eﬀect of women’s bargaining power on nutrition is
linear within the distribution of children under-5.

Figure 1. Decision-power within the household (n = 837 married women).

20

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

The survey was carried out during May and June 2009, at
the end of the dry and warm agricultural season. Note that
in the survey area, nutritional situation appears to vary
depending on the season and is found to deteriorate during
the rainy season (Beneﬁce, Chevassus-Agnes, & Barral,
1984). Given that there are seasonal diﬀerences in anthropo-
metric indicators and that our study focuses on the dry season
that lasts 9–10 months, our results may not be extendable to
the rainy season. The survey targeted rural households, who
live on agriculture and belong to a farmer organization; a local
grassroots organization managed by an elected farmer. Farms
are owned and run by families and most of the farmers in
Senegal belong to a farmer organization, which appears to
be a very important social structure in Senegal (DeJanvry &
Sadoulet, 2004). Farmer organizations aim to furnish techni-
cal assistance to farmers, help in the management of collective
goods (rough grazing, water), help with training and informa-
tion transmission, are involved in external representation and
in the defence of the interest of their members, in this sense
they act as labor unions. But most importantly, farmer
organizations provide insurance and social cohesion to their
members
the Senegalese Agricultural Development
Bank (CNCAS) only allocates collective loans to ﬁnance agri-
cultural inputs to farmer organizations’ members. To sample
the 505 households, 3 a two-stage stratiﬁed sampling proce-
dure was used, where ﬁrst 93 farmer organizations using the
Probability-Proportional-to-Size (PPS) method were ran-
domly selected and second households were randomly selected
from the farmer organization, which ensures that each house-
hold has the same probability of inclusion in the sample. All
the children under-5 of the households sampled are included
in the analysis.

since

(c) Dependent variable (H)

We measure child nutritional status by the MUAC that is
the circumference of the left upper arm, measured at the
mid-point between the tip of the shoulder and the tip of the
elbow. Note that we received MUAC brassards as well as
information on their use and on standardization methods
from a Nutrition specialist of the UNICEF and this informa-
tion was communicated to interviewers through training ses-
sions. The MUAC is expressed in terms of z-scores from
international references curves developed by the WHO/
NCHS, 4 and is computed using the LSM method 5 since
anthropometric indicators are found to have a right-skewed
distribution (Kuczmarski et al., 2000). One may want to note
that the MUAC z-score based indicator, which adjusts for age
and sex, is arguably preferable over a single cut-oﬀ value for
several reasons. Firstly, the use of a ﬁxed cut-oﬀ may result
in wasting being over-diagnosed among young children and
under-diagnosed among older children (Briend, Wojtyniak,
& Rowland, 1987; Hall, Chowdhury, & Bloem, 1993). Sec-
ondly, a single cut-oﬀ point for boys and girls may not be
appropriate since there is a diﬀerence between their MUAC
z-scores in WHO reference curves. Finally, there is still a de-
bate on the appropriate cut-oﬀ points. More precisely, while
moderate wasting is commonly deﬁned as a ﬁxed cut-oﬀ point
of 12.5 cm and severe wasting is ﬁxed at 11.5 cm (World
Health Organization, 2009), the cut-oﬀ points may, however,
change since they are generally calculated with respect to the
mortality probability or in relation to another wasting indica-
tor (generally, the weight-for-height indicator). One may also
want to note that the MUAC indicator is often preferred to
the weight-for-height indicator in nonemergency situations
(Berkley et al., 2005; Briend et al., 1987; Chen, Chowdhury,

& Huﬀman, 1980; Trowbridge & Sommer, 1981; Van den
Broeck, Eeckels, & Massa, 1996) since it has been found to
be a better predictor of child mortality in developing countries
(Bairagi, 1981; Briend & Zimicki, 1986; De Onis, Yip, & Mei,
1997).

(d) Measure of women’s bargaining power (uf)

The data set includes several questions that aim to measure
women’s bargaining power; details of which are presented in
Appendix 1. Broadly these ascertain who makes decisions con-
cerning the wife’s health, the children’s health, the schooling of
the children, daily expenditures,
large expenditures, food
cooked, visits to the wife’s relatives, and whether the wife
can go out without the permission of her husband. Based on
this set of questions, we constructed a direct multidimensional
measure via Multiple Correspondence Analysis (MCA) by
using the Burt matrix approach on four categorical variables
describing who made the decision (the woman alone, her hus-
band alone, or both spouses). More speciﬁcally, MCA indi-
cated that questions concerning the woman’s labor status
and decision-making regarding the health of the respondent,
the visits to the respondent’s relatives, and the ability to leave
the house without permission (Q1, Q4, Q10, and Q11 in
Appendix 1) best captured common features across the set
of questions. Indeed, this may be explained by the fact that
the bargaining power of the respondent would be very low if
she cannot decide on outcomes that directly aﬀect her well-
being.

Weights and contribution of the diﬀerent variables included
in the MCA are presented in Appendix 2. The constructed
summary variable Multidim_wom provides our base indicator
of women’s bargaining power, although we also experiment
with other indicators in order to check the robustness of the
results.

(e) Child characteristics (I)

In Sub-Saharan African countries it has been found that
young boys are more likely to suﬀer from malnutrition than
young girls (Svedberg, 1990; Wamani, Astrom, Peterson,
Tumwine, & Tylleskar, 2007), while the opposite is found in
South Asia because of the high discrimination against girls
(Gupta, 1987), and we thus include a gender dummy in our
analysis. We also control for child’s age. Child rank or birth
order has also been discovered to aﬀect child health in that
it can determine the amount of resources allocated relative
to siblings (Gupta, 1990). However, since children with a high
rank necessarily belong to larger households, one needs to
purge family size eﬀects from any measure of birth order.
The method employed here to determine the relative rank of
the child among siblings follows Booth and Kee (2009) and
consists of dividing the birth order by the average birth order.
Importantly, the consideration of gender in addition to the
birth order eﬀect can bring additional information on parental
preferences. For instance, Pande (2003) showed that in India
the preference for sons explains why girls born after multiple
daughters are more likely to be severely undernourished and
less immunized, while boys who were born after multiple
daughters have signiﬁcantly better health outcomes. To con-
trol for the gender of siblings, we thus include the number
of brothers and sisters. Since the number of brothers and sis-
ters is added at the child level, the number of other individuals
in the household also needs to be included in order to take ac-
count of total household size. One might also expect that chil-
dren who are not the children of the head of household will

THE EFFECT OF WOMEN’S BARGAINING POWER ON CHILD NUTRITION IN RURAL SENEGAL

21

receive fewer resources, so a binary variable is included to con-
trol for this. Finally, we also control for the health insurance
status of the children. Note that this variable is not a choice
variable since 89% of the children who have a health insurance
are covered by a compulsory scheme because one of their par-
ents is working in the formal sector.

(f) Household and parental characteristics (P)

In terms of household characteristics, given its well estab-
lished relationship with child nutrition, income is captured
through the logarithm of monthly total household expenditure
expressed in adult equivalents. Since the method to collect
household expenditure data may aﬀect household expenditure
level (Beegle, De Weerdt, Friedman, and Gibson, 2012), one
has to consider several elements when computing household
expenditures. Firstly, concerning the recall period, household
expenditures were computed by using a 30 day recall period
since we assume that memory lapse is more likely to be an is-
sue than telescoping bias. Note that when no expenditure was
spent the month prior to the survey, the question on expendi-
ture level was asked in reference to the last 12 months. Sec-
ondly, concerning the items
included in the household
expenditure index we followed the recommendations of Dea-
ton and Zaidi (1999) who suggest excluding lumpy expendi-
tures and nonfood expenditures that do not contribute to
household wealth and deﬁned as regrettable necessities (e.g.,
health expenditure) in order to consider consumption in refer-
ence to a “usual month.” Since farming households were self-
employed, consumption expenditure also includes the value of
home-produced food. Regarding nonfood items, the index in-
cludes the amount spent on clothing, transports, communica-
tion, energy, and education as well as remittances. Finally, the
expenditure index was deﬂated by the household size and
household composition (Deaton & Zaidi, 1999). The relative
cost of a child relative to that of an adult was set at 0.3 and
the extent of economies of scale at 0.8. 6

Rather than using a socio-economic index that may capture
both income and housing quality simultaneously, we instead
control for income and housing quality directly. We use a
summary variable Housing for the latter as created by using
a factor analysis based on household characteristics (access
to electricity, the type of sanitary facilities, and the type of en-
ergy used for cooking). One may want to note that the corre-
lation between the income and housing variable is low
(coeﬃcient correlation = 0.06), so the two variables are likely
to capture diﬀerent things and can be included together. In or-
der to control for the preference for health of the household,
the percentage of monthly health expenditure in total monthly
expenditure is also added as a control. We expect that children
in households who allocate a higher proportion of their budget
toward health will be more likely to have a greater MUAC
z-score.

In terms of parental characteristics, spouses’ age, spouses’
education, and the rank of the mother among other wives
are likely to matter. More speciﬁcally, spouses’ age can posi-
tively inﬂuence child health status as experience and informa-
tion may be lacking among youngest parents. But the eﬀect of
age on child nutrition may also depend on the assumption that
parents may rely on their children for old age support and we
do not know if younger or older parents may have a stronger
utility in relying on their children for old age support.

The eﬀect of parent’s education is also undetermined a
priori. In some papers, women’s education is found to aﬀect
positively child nutrition (Wamani, Tylleskar, Astrom,
Tumwine, & Peterson, 2004) through the use of preventive

and curative modern health care (Glewwe, 1999) and the bet-
ter use of information received by reading newspapers, listen-
ing to a radio, or watching TV (Thomas, Strauss, &
Henriques, 1991). Nevertheless, since education is also a proxy
of the socio-economic status and geographical location of the
household, it is hard to conclude that there is a causality link
between educational attainment and child health (Desai &
Alva, 1998). Indeed, economic improvement associated with
education, such as the use of drinkable water, latrine facility,
and housing quality, aﬀects child health. There could also be
a heterogeneous eﬀect of parent’s education on child nutrition
depending on the child’s sex (Thomas, 1994). To capture edu-
cational attainment of the mother and father, we include a cat-
egorical variable of their ability to write a letter.

In the area of the survey divorce and separation are extre-
mely rare, that is, only 1% of the sample is divorced or sepa-
rated. In contrast, polygamy is fairly common, where 32% of
married women are in a polygamous union in our data. As
a matter of fact, Senegal has the second highest rate of polyg-
amy in Western Africa after Guinea (Dalton & Leung, 2011)
and most polygamous males follow the Islamic and legal rules
that limit the number of wives to four. It is suspected that re-
sources might be scarcer when the child lives under a polyga-
mous union, although it is not clear in the literature if they do
better than those in monogamous unions. For instance,
Gibson and Mace (2007) found in Southern Ethiopia that chil-
dren of the ﬁrst wives in polygamous unions have a better
nutritional status than those in monogamous unions and ex-
plain this by the possibility that older wives may beneﬁt from
polygamy by “exploiting junior co-wives or experiencing a
long period of monogamy with a high status male, conse-
quently maximize both oﬀspring quality and quantity.”
Amankwaa (1996, 2001) also found that polygamy enhanced
child survivorship through longer breastfeeding patterns, in-
ter-birth interval, and co-wives’ cooperation. In contrast, in
Ghana Gyimah (2003) discovered that children in polygamous
unions were more likely to have diarrhea than their monoga-
mous counterparts. Strassmann (1997) found among Dogon
in Mali that the odds of childhood deaths were 7–11 times
higher in groups with polygamy and suggests that this may
be due to lower paternal investment toward each child when
the number of children increases. Similar conclusions were
found by Gyimah (2009), Gage, Sommerfelt, and Piani
(1997), Ntozi and Nakanaabi (1997) and Brahmbhatt et al.
(2002).

The eﬀect of a wife’s rank on child outcome also remains
inconclusive in the literature. With regard to the context of
polygamous unions, some studies claim that there is equality
in treatment between wives (Mulder, 1989), while others found
that senior wives receive higher contributions than junior
wives (Gibson & Mace, 2007; Munro, Kebede, Tarazona-
Gomez, & Verschoor, 2010). In Senegal, ﬁrst wives and last
wives have speciﬁc roles in the household. First wives are rec-
ognized to have a higher social status than other wives, where
their role is to serve as an example to other wives. Although
there is a diﬀerence in status and role between ﬁrst and other
wives, there should not be any diﬀerence in treatment in Mus-
lim societies. Nonetheless, we want to allow for the possibility
that, ﬁrst, children under polygamous unions are treated dif-
ferently than children under monogamous unions and, second,
if under polygamous unions they are treated diﬀerently
depending on their mother’s rank. In the sample, only two
children are the children of a middle wife, which is due to
the fact that the percentage of children under-5 who have a
father married to three wives is very low. Since the middle
and last wives both joined a polygamous union, the middle

22

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

wives’ children are considered as last wives’ children. The var-
iable Rank of the wife is coded 0 for children whose mother is
in a monogamous union (reference category), 1 for children
whose mother entered a monogamous marriage but became
a ﬁrst wife when her spouse remarried an additional wife,
and 2 for children whose mother is the last wife. There are nev-
ertheless 9% of the children who cannot enter in any of the
previous categories since they belong to households whose
male head has no wife, either because the head is a woman
or because the children are not the children of the head. 7
For this reason, the variable rank of the wife will be coded
 1 for such children. 8 The rank of the wife is entered at the
child level, where in our sample 9% of the children have a
mother who is the ﬁrst wife and 13% are the children of the
last wife. Finally, 69% of the children live under a monoga-
mous union. To control for the fact that women might be
more autonomous when the husband does not live in the
household; the sex of the household head was also added as
a control variable.

(g) Extra-household environmental factors, community

characteristics, household eﬃciency, and prices (E, S, X, p)

In order to control

for extra-household environmental
factors and community characteristics we include a set of 16
community dummies controlling for extra-household environ-
mental factors that vary across communities. For relevant
prices, such as the price of food and medical services, we as-
sume, which seems reasonable given that all our surveyed
community lie within the same geographical area that these
are homogenous and are captured by the constant. Finally,
we make the assumption that household eﬃciency does also
not diﬀer across households in our survey so that this is simi-
larly captured by the intercept. 9

(h) Final sample

The dataset consists of information on 742 children aged be-
tween 91 and 1856 days. 10 Among these, 641 were measured,
where the loss is commonly due to an error from the inter-
viewer. More precisely, only rarely were there missing cases

due to the absence of the mother’s consent to measure her chil-
dren either because she refused, she was absent, or the absence
of the child on the day of the interview. Among the 641 chil-
dren, 591 were matched to their mother, where missing values
are due to the absence of the mother either because the mother
was dead or because the child was not the child of the head of
household (e.g., foster children). Finally, of the remaining
sample the mother’s bargaining power information was non-
missing for 578 children. Descriptive statistics of our variables
are provided in Table 1. Descriptive statistics indicate that on
average in the sample, 18% are mildly wasted (z-score <  1)
and 4% are moderately wasted (z-score <  2). The minimum
MUAC z-score is  5.6 standard deviations and the maximum
+4 standard deviations.

4. ESTIMATION

(a) Empirical model

Following Eqn. (4), child health is assumed to depend on:
ð5Þ
ijkl ¼ b0 þ b1umkl þ b2P jkl þ b3I ijkl þ b4V l þ eijkl
H
where H is the nutritional status of child i of parent j in family
k in community l measured by the MUAC z-score. u is a mea-
sure of the endogenous bargaining power of the mother, P is a
vector of parental and household’s characteristics, I is a vector
of child’s characteristics, V is a set of dummy variables meant
to capture community characteristics, b0 is a constant across
all observations capturing, among other common factors,
prices, household eﬃciency, and e is a standard error term.
The error term is assumed to be uncorrelated with all regres-
sors except u, which leads to an inconsistent estimator of b1.
For instance, a high women’s bargaining power could be asso-
ciated with a positive health context for the child if mothers
with better intrinsic characteristics are found to be more
powerful. In this case, there will be a positive bias in the esti-
mated b1 and regression estimates will overstate the positive
eﬀect of women’s bargaining power on child nutrition. On
the contrary, if it is assumed that “neglected wives” are more
autonomous, a high bargaining power would be associated

Table 1. Descriptive statistics on sample of children with nonmissing information on malnutrition and matched to their mother

Variables

Obs.

Mean and proportion

Standard deviation

MUAC z-score
Women’s bargaining power
Child’s age (in years)
Child’s sex (reference: boys)
Son of head of household (HH)
Relative rank of the child among siblings
Number of brothers
Number of sisters
Health insurance status
Number of other individuals
Sex of HH (reference: male)
Mother rank =  1 (Reference: Monogamy)
Mother rank = 1 (ﬁrst wife)
Mother rank =2 (last wife)
Mother’s age (in years)
Mother’s literacy
Father’s age (in years)
Father’s literacy
Share health in expenditure
Log of total expenditure
Housing quality

578
578
578
578
578
578
578
578
575
578
578
578
578
578
578
578
578
577
576
578
578

0.09
 0.127
2.536
0.481
0.649
1.34
1.952
1.817
0.064
7.204
0.069
0.095
0.087
0.125
32.026
0.249
49.615
0.246
0.065
4.302
0.088

1.273
0.979
1.386
0.5
0.478
0.324
1.454
1.316
0.246
4.099
0.254
0.294
0.281
0.331
7.287
0.433
12.638
0.431
0.086
0.436
0.961

Min
 5.661
 1.499
0.25
0
0
0.4
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
16
0
24
0
0
3.063
 5.322

Max

4.048
1.687
5.085
1
1
1.8
7
6
1
17
1
1
1
1
51
1
87
1
0.75
5.823
2.937

THE EFFECT OF WOMEN’S BARGAINING POWER ON CHILD NUTRITION IN RURAL SENEGAL

23

with a negative context for child nutrition and regression
estimates will underestimate the positive eﬀect of women’s
bargaining power on child nutrition.

To obtain a consistent estimator, we assume the existence of
an Instrumental Variable (IV) z that ﬁrstly, satisﬁes the
assumption that Cov(zmkl , eijkl) = 0, so that the IV is uncor-
related with the error term. The second requirement involves
the relationship between the IV and the endogenous variable:
umkl ¼ d0 þ d1P jkl þ d2I ijkl þ d3V l þ h1zmkl þ rijkl
ð6Þ
– 0, suggesting that the IV is partially correlated
where h1
with the endogenous variable once the exogenous variables
have been considered. Thus, the instrument z needs to be
strongly correlated with female bargaining power once the
explanatory variables have been included, but uncorrelated
with other unobservable factors captured in the child health
error term.

Our construction of a plausible instrumental variable relates
to the role of ethnicity of the mother of the child in terms of
her bargaining power. More speciﬁcally, diﬀerent ethnic
groups may have diﬀerent social norms that will inﬂuence
threat points in intra-household bargaining (McElroy, 1990).
For example, women from diﬀerent ethnic groups of Burkina
Faso are found to have diﬀerent labor allocations and to re-
ceive diﬀerent resources for health from their spouse depend-
ing on their bargaining power (Kevane & Wydick, 2001;
Nikie`ma, Haddad, & Potvin, 2008). In the Senegalese context,
we take advantage of the fact that generally Tukulor Fula wo-
men are less autonomous than Wolof women because of his-
torical reasons. That is, Wolof women have always played
an important political role since their society relies on a matri-
lineal political system, and this dates back to the pre-colonial
period (Diouf, 1990). In contrast, Fula societies, which were
Islamized before Wolof, have been characterized by a patrilin-
eal political system in which women do not play any role (Syl-
la, 2001). As highlighted in the Ethnographic Atlas of
Murdock (1967), in contrast to the Wolof, Tukulor Fula do
not have any matrilineal kin group as they always belong to
the father’s lineage.

In this regard, however, when one regresses the variable eth-
nicity (Fula) coded 1 if the mother of the child is Fula and 0 if
she is Wolof on women’s bargaining power, as captured by
our proxy variable, the sign is positive but not statistically sig-
niﬁcant—see the ﬁrst column in Table 2. 11 However, as soon
as we control for whether the woman lives in a community
where her ethnicity is minority in the second column of
Table 2, the ethnicity variable becomes signiﬁcantly negative.
This is due to the fact that it is not the ethnicity per say that
matters for female bargaining power, but the context in which
this ethnicity is placed. More precisely, Fula households are
more likely to live in a diﬀerent ethnic community (10%

Table 2. Association between women’s bargaining power and the proposed

instrumental variable

Variables

Ethnicity (Fula = 1, Wolof = 0)

Ethnicity is minority in the community

Relative_ethnicity

R2

(1)

0.068
(0.255)

(2)
 0.419*
(0.228)
0.788***
(0.257)

0.237

0.252

(3)

 0.406*
(0.1226)
0. 249

Observations = 446, Robust standard errors in parentheses.
*** p < 0.01.
**p < 0.05.
* p < 0.1.

among Fula live in a Wolof community while only 1% of
Wolof live in a Fula community) and Fula women living in
a Wolof community are found to have the strongest bargain-
ing power among the women of the data set, as conﬁrmed by
simple t-tests. One could wonder about the reason why Fula
women who live in Wolof communities have a greater bargain-
ing power than their Wolof counterparts. Such a ﬁnding is, for
example, not explained by religious reasons since Wolof and
Fula households belong to the same Muslim brotherhood
(Tijaniyyah). Rather we think that, Fula living in a Wolof
community are less exposed to social norms of the community
and thus these Fula women are less likely to receive social pen-
alties for failing to conform to the norms in the community
than Wolof women.

To capture the eﬀect of ethnicity on bargaining power
conditional on whether the ethnicity is a minority in the
community of residence, we constructed a variable Relative_
ethnicity, 12 which takes the value of 1 if the mother is Fula
and lives in a Wolof village, which is the reference category
(5.2% of children are in this category), of 2 if the mother is
Wolof and lives in a Wolof village (60.4%), and of 3 if the
mother is Fula and lives in a Fula village (34.4%). The 1%
of Wolof who lives in a Fula neighborhood is included in
the last category since we make the assumption that the ethnic-
ity of the community has more eﬀect on woman’s relative
status than the ethnicity of the woman. Note that because
inter-ethnic marriage is not common and concerns only two
households in the sample, the ethnicity of the woman is the
same as household ethnicity. As it can be seen from Table 2,
this variable is a signiﬁcant predictor of women’s bargaining
power and takes on the expected negative sign.

It is important to state the underlying identifying assump-
tion of using Relative_ethnicity as instrument z. More speciﬁ-
cally, the identifying assumption is that there are no other
factors correlated with our variable that we will not control
for that are directly correlated with child nutrition. Given
the nature of our variable, this would refer to other factors
that are correlated with the decision to migrate as well as with
the relative ethnicity of women, but for convenience sake we
discuss these two factors separately.

One could argue that there might be a selection bias among
the households who live in a diﬀerent ethnic area, particularly
if the household is a ﬁrst-generation migrant. More speciﬁ-
cally, it seems reasonable to think that households who mi-
grate within rural areas may have diﬀerent observable and
unobservable characteristics that can also directly aﬀect child
nutritional status. In the literature, it appears that rural migra-
tions are mostly explained by marital reasons and that “among
farm households with equal endowments of wealth, those af-
ﬂicted with more variable proﬁts from cultivation are more
likely to initiate arrangement conducive to income risk pooling
that encompass greater distances, via both temporary mi-
grants and longer-distance migration associated with mar-
riage” (Rosenzweig & Stark, 1989). For this reason, we
further questioned Fula households who are currently living
in Wolof rural communities about the time and the reason
of their migration. The most important ﬁnding was that
migration has not occurred recently. Indeed, Fula households
surveyed had been in the Wolof communities already for a
long time, since their nomad descendants, coming from North
Africa, decided to settle in Wolof areas in order to conduct
agricultural work centuries ago. In this regard, one may also
want to note that our data set only covers farming households
who own agricultural land and belong to a farmer organiza-
tion. Although in theory, land use rights in Senegal are attrib-
uted by local land committees and thus cannot be sold or

24

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

bequeathed (Caverivie´re, 1986), Lambert, Ravallion, and Van
de Walle (2011) have found that among a national representa-
tive sample of Senegalese, 48% of them reported that land was
inherited and 71% among the sample whose father has died.
Thus, one can be fairly conﬁdent that Fula households have
inherited their lands many generations ago. It is then unlikely
that the Fula households within our sample who live in Wolof
communities have migrated any time recently and that we
therefore need to worry about unobservable factors that af-
fected their migration and current child nutritional status.

One may also want to note that ethnicity per say could of
course be questioned as an identifying factor if, for instance,
ethnic background aﬀects anthropometric indicators through
genetic predispositions. One should note that this question
has been widely discussed in the literature, notably in order
to know if the reference standards drawn from a sample of
well nourished white children from developed countries could
be applicable to children from developing countries. The fa-
mous paper of Habicht, Martorell, Yarbrough, Malina, and
Klein (1974) brought evidence that the diﬀerence of growth
of preschool children of diﬀerent ethnicities were determined
mostly by environmental rather than genetic factors.

We also ran a number of supplementary regressions to pro-
vide some evidence for the absence of a direct relationship be-
tween child malnutrition and the instrument. More speciﬁcally
we analyzed the eﬀect of the instrument on the main nutrition
status determinants according to the UNICEF, that is, on
health environment, food security, and quality of caring.

In order to investigate the eﬀect of the instrument on the
health environment, we looked at the eﬀect of the instrument
on the likelihood of being sick the month prior to the survey
assuming that the health environment has an impact on the dis-
ease frequency. In the sample, 36% of the children had an illness
the month prior to the survey, however once one controls for the
district speciﬁc eﬀects the eﬀect of the Relative_ethnicity vari-
able is not found to be diﬀerent from 0. We also looked at the
eﬀect of the instrument on the access to drinking water, and
after controlling for socio-economic characteristics and district
ﬁxed eﬀects, the instrument was also not found to be a predictor
of the quality of water used for drinking.

Concerning the eﬀect of the instrument on the quality of car-
ing, ethnicity could also directly aﬀect child nutritional status
through a cultural belief system regarding infant feeding. In-
deed food taboos, maternal attitude, and the recognition of
a special diet for children can vary depending on the ethnicity
and have a direct eﬀect on child nutritional status and some
evidences of this are present in the anthropology of health lit-
erature. In Zaria in Nigeria, for example, Jinadu, Ojofeitimi,
and Osifor (1986) ﬁnds that 83% of the mothers never give
meat or ﬁsh to their children since they believe that rich pro-
tein aliments cause intestinal worm and stomach pains, while
70% think that giving eggs to a child would make the child
steal. In a poor area of Mali, Dettwyler (1986) found that
when a child does not come to eat, the mother will never force
him since she will consider he is not hungry. Mothers also be-
lieve that a child does not need to eat solid food before 8
months. Opposite results were found in Togo where mothers
use the practice of infant force-feeding that has a negative ef-
fect on child health. Among Ibo and Ewe ethnicities, children
will probably have a better nutritional status, ceteris paribus,
since they have special food for infants that is known to be
of high-protein content (Cantrelle & Locoh, 1990). To the best
of our knowledge, there are no food taboos that could diﬀer
between Wolof and Fula ethnic groups. Male genital mutila-
tion has a direct eﬀect on infant health as circumcision is
found to reduce urinary tract infections but is also found to

be a source of infection (Singh-Grewal, Macdessi, & Craig,
2005). Murdock (1967) highlighted that there was no anthro-
pological diﬀerences concerning male genital mutilations be-
tween Wolof and Tukulor Fula men.

We also analyzed the likelihood of seeking treatment from a
qualiﬁed provider during the last illness by including the vari-
ables presented in Table 1 as well as variables measuring sup-
ply side aspect such as the accessibility of health facilities and
prices and quality of medical services oﬀered in the closest pri-
mary health care facility as modelled in Le´pine & Le Nestour
(2013). Results indicated that the instrument was not a signif-
icant predictor of the likelihood of visiting a qualiﬁed health
worker during the last illness. We also investigated the eﬀect
of the instrument on several health inputs that had a good var-
iability in the sample. We found that the instrument was nei-
ther a signiﬁcant predictor of
the likelihood of being
immunized against DCT nor of the likelihood of receiving
assistance from a qualiﬁed health worker during delivery nor
of the likelihood of delivering at home.

In order to test for a diﬀerence in diet and food security, several
food expenditures 13 were regressed on a set of socio-economic
determinants (household size, nonfood expenditure amount,
and self-consumption expenditure amount), district dummies
and on the instrument. Results showed that the instrument was
not a predictor of most of food expenditures, which suggests that
the Fula living in Wolof areas and Fula and Wolof living in their
area do not spend diﬀerent amounts of money on several food
expenditures after accounting for household size. Thus, the
quantity of food consumed may be similar among the house-
holds. We also analyzed the eﬀect of the instrument on the pro-
portion of speciﬁc food expenditures in total food expenditures
in order to test its eﬀect on dietary quality. Following the food
pyramid of the U.S. Department of Agriculture, we created the
share of food recommended for frequent consumption (fresh
fruits and vegetables), food not recommended for frequent con-
sumption (fats and oils, desserts, and sugar) and other foods
(grain, meat, dairy, and ﬁsh). While controlling, for household
size, income, and location dummies, the instrument was also
not found to be a predictor of these diﬀerent categories of food.
Finally, the nutritional status was regressed on the endoge-
nous bargaining power measure and its instrument. Similarly,
the relative ethnicity is not found to be a direct determinant of
child nutrition, but aﬀects child nutrition through bargaining
power, since it is not signiﬁcant in explaining child nutrition
and as well as because the coeﬃcient of the bargaining power
variable is lower once the instrument is added as a control (see
column 2 of Table 3), a more formal identiﬁcation test con-
ducted later in the paper conﬁrms the instrument validity.
Thus, there is little reason to believe that the distribution of
well nourished under-5 children is directly aﬀected by the rel-
ative ethnicity variable. Consequently, after controlling for
environmental factors, there should not be any eﬀect of the rel-
ative ethnicity on the anthropometric indicator.

(b) Results

In terms of estimating the eﬀect of women’s bargaining
power on child nutrition, one should note that mothers have
several children on average, so that, since estimates are con-
ducted at the child level, the error term might not be indepen-
dently and identically distributed. We thus calculate standard
errors that are clustered by the mother in order to obtain a
cluster–robust covariance matrix estimator.

Column (1) of Table 3 ﬁrst presents the determinants of
child nutritional status without controlling for the endogeneity
of woman’s bargaining power using Ordinary Least Squared

THE EFFECT OF WOMEN’S BARGAINING POWER ON CHILD NUTRITION IN RURAL SENEGAL

25

Table 3. Determinants of child nutrition

Variables

Multidim_wom
Child’s age (in years)
Child’s sex (ref: boys)
Child of head
Health insurance
Relative rank of the child among siblings
Number of brothers
Number of sisters
Number of other individuals
Gender of HH (ref: male)
Rank wife =  1 (ref: monogamy)
First wife (ref: monogamy)
Last wife (ref: monogamy)
Age of mother (in years)
Mother literacy (ref: illiterate)
Age of father (in years)
Father literacy (ref: illiterate)
Log of expenditure
Share health in expenditure
Housing quality
Relative_ethnicity (ref: Fula mother in Wolof community)
Observations
R2
F-test of instrument in ﬁrst stage

Robust standard errors in parentheses.
* p < 0.1.
** p < 0.05.
*** p < 0.01.

(1)
OLS

Coeﬀ.
0.237***
 0.161***
0.220**
0.243
0.068
0.070
0.056
0.095*
0.021
 0.262
0.546
 0.029
 0.385*
 0.012
0.172
0.012*
 0.119
0.409***
1.748**
0.052

572
0.18

(2)
OLS

(3)
2SLS

SE

Coeﬀ.
0.216***
0.065
0.043  0.153***
0.229**
0.112
0.242
0.243
0.232  0.009
0.109
0.217
0.053
0.055
0.094*
0.056
0.020
0.024
0.414  0.288
0.589
0.363
0.239  0.095
0.217  0.417*
0.012  0.010
0.148
0.158
0.013**
0.006
0.150  0.108
0.415***
0.129
1.749**
0.779
0.076
0.064
 0.350
565
0.18

SE

Coeﬀ.
0.806**

0.064
0.044  0.167***
0.204*
0.114
0.243
0.065
0.237
0.355
0.219
0.033
0.053
0.051
0.113*
0.057
0.020
0.018
0.414  0.277
0.362
0.378
0.231
0.060
0.213  0.253
0.012  0.014
0.148
0.112
0.006
0.008
0.150  0.045
0.369**
0.136
1.068
0.797
0.078
0.015
0.214

565
0.04

(4)
2SLS

Coeﬀ.

SE

0.023
0.042
0.302

0.341
0.047
0.123
0.309
0.313  0.618**
0.233
0.129
0.057
0.006
0.064  0.031
0.009
0.022
0.510  0.019
0.358
0.414
0.260  0.263
0.243  0.278
0.006
0.012
0.161
0.078
0.007
0.008
0.164  0.107
0.078
0.155
1.156**
0.922
0.077
0.083
 0.594***
565
0.28

SE

0.033
0.081
0.218
0.281
0.170
0.049
0.052
0.019
0.317
0.253
0.188
0.178
0.009
0.112
0.005
0.123
0.142
0.487
0.072
0.164

13.15***

(OLS). As it can be seen, a unit increase in our female bargain-
ing power proxy, Multidim_wom, increases child nutritional
status, as measured by the MUAC z-score, by 0.24 standard
deviations. Note that in column (3), once we use the two-stage
least squares (2SLS) 14 to instrument for the potential endoge-
neity of this variable using our instrument Relative_ethnicity,
the estimated impact more than triples, rising to 0.81 for each
unit increase in bargaining power. This suggests that not con-
trolling for endogeneity of female bargaining power tends to
under-estimate its eﬀect on child nutrition. In other words,
in rural Senegal women with a high bargaining power are
more likely to live in a bad environment for child nutrition.
The most plausible explanation for this ﬁnding is that, less
attention by husband is associated with more powerful moth-
ers, but that these powerful mothers receive fewer resources
from their partner. Our results on the eﬀect of female bargain-
ing power on child nutrition rest of course on the validity of
the instrument. In this regard one may ﬁrst note that the F-sta-
tistic in the ﬁrst-stage is big enough to pass the weak instru-
ment test (F = 13.7, P-value < 0.01) and thus suggests that
our instrument has a considerable predictive power on the
endogenous variable.

Although not the main focus of our study, the results of our
estimation also highlight other important determinants of the
child nutritional status. More speciﬁcally, malnutrition in-
creases with child age, where an additional year decreases
the MUAC z-score by around 0.17 standard deviations. Girls
have a greater MUAC z-score than boys by 0.2 standard devi-
ations. Child’s rank and the number of brothers have no eﬀect
on malnutrition, while the number of sisters is positively cor-
related with the MUAC. One plausible explanation is that
girls usually take care of their younger siblings. For instance,

if older sisters allocate time to their younger brothers they will
be more able to satisfy the child’s needs. 15 Income measured
by total monthly expenditure is a strong determinant of a
child’s nutritional status, where an increase of one point in
the logarithm improves the MUAC z-score by 0.37 points.
Since expenditure could be endogenous, the asset index was
used as a proxy for permanent income. The weights used to
construct the indicator are derived from the ﬁrst dimension
of MCA and includes the assets owned by the household
(fridge, air conditioner, fan, radio, TV, and vehicle). The use
of the asset index did not alter the results as we ﬁnd that an
increase in one standard deviation in the asset index increases
the MUAC z-score by 0.14 standard deviations (P-va-
lue < 0.05) under IV and the eﬀect of one standard deviation
in the bargaining power index increases the MUAC z-score
by 0.79 standard deviations.

We also experimented with employing other measures of
women’s bargaining power with Relative_ethnicity as instru-
ment. More speciﬁcally, we employed a categorical measure
of women’s bargaining power that gives information on who
is the decision maker concerning child health, where this bin-
ary variable is coded 1 if the mother is involved in the decision
process concerning child health, that is, either because she de-
cides alone or she decides with her husband, and zero other-
wise. OLS results with this proxy indicated that when the
mother is involved in the decision making, the MUAC z-score
increases by 0.41 standard deviations. However, unfortunately
Relative_ethnicity was not suﬃciently correlated to this binary
variable (F-stat = 0) to serve as a valid predictor of it in the
ﬁrst-stage. We then analyzed the eﬀect on child nutrition of
several other multidimensional measures of women’s bargain-
ing power. For example, one measure used was based on the

26

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

women’s decision-making power on expenditure Multi-
dim_exp, while another captured the power to make decisions
concerning child schooling and child health Multidim_child
and a last measure Multidim included all the variables pre-
sented in Appendix 1. Again, although the coeﬃcients based
on OLS regression were similar to the one found with the
proxy of women’s bargaining power of choice, (b1 = 0.27,
P < 0.01; b1 = 0.18, P < 0.01 and b1 = 0.23, P < 0.01 respec-
tively), the instrument did not have enough predictive power
with these measures
(F-stat = 3.7 and F-stat = 0.7 and
F-stat = 0.9 respectively).

To allow for nonlinearity in the bargaining power eﬀect
depending on the child nutritional status, we also employed
IV and nonIV quantile regression methods, where the esti-
mated eﬀect can be measured along the distribution of the
MUAC values. We depict the estimated coeﬃcients and their
95% conﬁdence bands along the 18th until the 89th quantiles
of the distribution of the MUAC in Figures 2 and 3. 16 Under
OLS, the impact of women’s bargaining power is stronger for
children with a greater MUAC z-score. Under IV, the graphs
indicate that the eﬀect of bargaining power, when signiﬁcant,
is greater for all the children, no matter what their MUAC
level. Perhaps more importantly, there appears to be a greater
bargaining enhancing eﬀect for the children with extreme
MUAC z-scores. After correcting for endogeneity, the down-
ward bias is found to be the greatest for the children with a
low MUAC z-score.

(c) Robustness checks

Instead of using our ordered variable as instrumental vari-
able, we alternatively tried decomposing it into a dummy for
the ethnicity; a dummy if the ethnicity is minority in the com-
munity and their interaction and then utilizing them jointly as
instrumental variables. Although the signiﬁcance on these
instrumental variables in the ﬁrst-stage was found to be some-
what weaker, they were still highly statistically signiﬁcant
(F-stat = 6). Moreover, having several instruments allows us
to run a test for overidentiﬁcation 17 (P-value = 0.33) using
the same model, which provided further support for the valid-
ity of our instrumental variable approach. The resultant esti-
mated coeﬃcient on (instrumented) bargaining power proxy
in the second stage was found to be very close (0.82) to the
one where we used the ordered variable as instrument and sim-
ilarly was statistically signiﬁcant at the 5% level. 18

Figure 2. NonIV quantile regression estimates.

Figure 3. IV quantile regression estimates.

Following Duﬂo and Udry (2004), we also used climatic
shocks; rain and evapotranspiration shocks occurring the year
before the survey in reference to the 10 years period average
and their interaction term, as instruments for bargaining
power. In the sample the shocks had an eﬀect on the likelihood
for women of working in household ﬁelds and diﬀerent eﬀects
on the productivity of women’s and men’s ﬁelds. However, be-
cause of the low variability in evapotranspiration in the area,
the district dummies were replaced by several variables captur-
ing the characteristics of the community, so we were not able
to introduce those IV in the same model. 19 We also controlled
for the agricultural revenue, 20 computed by multiplying the
quantity in kilos of each crop produced by the household dur-
ing the last year by its price at the time of the sale, in order to
take into account the fact that a climatic shock could aﬀect
nutrition through a change in food availability in the house-
hold. By doing so, we found that an increase in one standard
deviation in the woman’s bargaining power increases the
MUAC z-score by 0.5 standard deviations, conﬁrming the
ﬁnding of the downward bias. 21 The F-stat was 12 and the
overidentiﬁcation test P-value was 0.18.

The analysis was also conducted for the sub-sample of
women whose husband was absent during the interview. On
average,
it was found that the presence of the husband
increases the average women’s power. In the sample, the
average of women’s power was  0.05 but it was only  0.14
in the sample of women whose husbands did not attend the
interview. The coeﬃcient of woman’s bargaining power was
stronger when the analysis only focused on the 439 women
whose husbands were absent during the interview, as an
increase in one standard deviation in the woman’s power index
was shown to increase the MUAC z-score by 0.96 standard
deviations (F-stat = 25). However, it should be noted that
there might be a selection bias in that the presence of the hus-
band at the woman’s interview may not have been random.

5. CONCLUDING REMARKS

We investigated whether mother’s bargaining power im-
proves child nutritional status using data on a rural Senegalese
region. To estimate this, we employ an instrumental variable
strategy, which corrects for the potential endogeneity of the
mother’s bargaining power. Although, in the literature it is
generally assumed that unobservable characteristics of the

THE EFFECT OF WOMEN’S BARGAINING POWER ON CHILD NUTRITION IN RURAL SENEGAL

27

tend to over-estimate the coeﬃcient of

mother will
the
mother’s bargaining power, our results indicate that the coef-
ﬁcient is downward biased under standard OLS, especially for
children with a low MUAC z-score. A possible reason for the
downward bias is that in Senegal a high mother’s bargaining
power may be associated with a low investment of fathers in
their wives and children, resulting in an unfavorable context
for child health. In our data set, the woman’s bargaining
power measure may thus capture the lack of paternal invest-
ment, which would justify that male spouse’s unobserved par-
enting ability is negatively correlated with mother’s bargaining
power and positively correlated with the child MUAC z-score.
The ﬁndings presented in this paper corroborate those of
previous studies where women’s bargaining power is discov-
ered to be a strong determinant of child nutrition. However,
although women’s bargaining power is found to always have
a positive eﬀect on child nutrition under OLS and IV, the
ﬁnding that OLS estimates are downward biased may suggest
that more women’s power is associated with a worse environ-
ment for child nutrition. This ﬁnding is counterintuitive and
probably due to social norms in Senegal. Indeed, this result
may not be relevant to diﬀerent settings, especially where a
high woman’s decision power is widely accepted by society.
The estimated impact presented here may also vary in other
settings and may depend on the measure of women’s bargain-
ing power.

Although our results are robust to the use of diﬀerent mea-
sures of bargaining power and instruments, our paper suﬀers
from several limitations. A main limitation is that our data
set only included information on the MUAC so it was not pos-
sible to test if women’s bargaining power also has an eﬀect on
stunting and other measures of wasting. The paper also did
not address how a change in woman’s bargaining power over

time aﬀects child nutrition. Indeed, an explicit investigation of
the main determinants of a change in bargaining power in a
society as well as their eﬀect on child outcomes would be of
a particular interest.

Future studies could undertake similar analysis in diﬀerent
settings in order to see if the downward bias is conﬁrmed in
other low-income countries. It would also be very useful to test
the coherence of the results under diﬀerent measures of bar-
gaining power using an identical instrumental variable strat-
egy or any other appropriate method to correct for the
endogeneity of women’s bargaining power. Finally, as stated
before, the eﬀect of women’s bargaining power on several
nutrition and health outcomes could be explored in future
works.

Our results have several implications. Firstly, results indi-
cate that women’s bargaining power is an important determi-
nant of child nutrition and policies that aim to increase
women’s power such as microﬁnance projects could appear
to be very eﬀective as they will not only increase the well-being
of women but will also generate positive externalities toward
children, especially toward the most vulnerable ones. How-
ever, the ﬁnding that high women’s power is currently associ-
ated with a negative context of child health supports the idea
that high woman’s power is currently looked down upon in
Senegalese society. Thus, policies aiming to increase women’s
bargaining power should point at a change in social norms. Fi-
nally, since women’s power is assumed to aﬀect child health
through health inputs, arguably eﬀorts should still be deployed
on policies aiming to prevent and cure severe malnutrition, so
the increase in women’s power as a strategy to ﬁght child mal-
nutrition should not take the place of nutrition policies but
rather should be seen as complementary.

NOTES

1. As a matter of fact, for many Senegalese women ﬁnancial responsi-
bility of the husband is a matter of honor, where ﬁnancially independent
women are often associated with sex-workers (Gue´rin, 2008; Pilon, Seidou
Mama, & Tichit, 1997).

7. Among those children 60% have a mother who is the head of the
household and is not married. For the rest of the children whose the head
of the household is a male, they are not the children of the head, they are
usually the children of a woman who live in the household but who is not
the wife of the head, usually the sister of the head.

2. As households diﬀer in size and demographic composition, equiva-
lence scales are used to make comparable consumption indicators.

3. The sample-size requirement was calculated in the framework of the
impact study of the agro-sylvo-pastoral insurance scheme by following the
methodology described in Duﬂo, Glennerster, and Kremer (2007, chap. 4)
to determine the Minimum Detectable size Eﬀect (MDE).

8. This variable is only weakly correlated with the presence of the father
in the household (coeﬃcient correlation =  0.36) or to the variable
capturing the gender of the head (coeﬃcient correlation =  0.34).

9. This could not be tested empirically.

4. World Health Organization and National Centre for Health Statistics.

10. References curves of WHO are computed for children aged between
91 and 1856 days.

½
ð
z score ¼ ðX
MÞL
SL

 1
Þ

5.
of the distribution, L is skewness, and S is the coeﬃcient of variation.

where X is the MUAC of the child, M is the median

6. We regressed monthly total expenditure over the number of adults and
the number of kids and by dividing the two coeﬃcients obtained we found
that an adult costs about three times more than a child. Concerning the
presence of economies of scale, we assumed very low economies of scale
since households consume more private goods but not the absence of
economies of scale since there might be some economies of scale in food
preparation if larger households are more likely to have a more eﬃcient
cook or if they are more eﬃcient at eliminating waste assuming that they
are more likely to own a fridge.

11. Estimates are conducted for women who have at least one child
under-5. Standard errors clustered at the household level are presented in
parentheses. Control variables include wife characteristics (age, literacy,
health status, share of earned income, work status, and farming worker),
husband characteristics (age, literacy, health status, and farming worker)
household characteristics (land area, number of kids, and polygamy) and
16 district dummies.

12. Note that seven Moorish children are excluded from the total sample
to simplify the construction and interpretation of
the instrumental
variable.

28

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

13. Several estimates were run for rice, poultry, meat, ﬁsh cereal, dairy
products, vegetable, fruit, sugar, and oil expenditures.

14.
In the ﬁrst stage, women’s bargaining power is regressed over all
exogenous variables and the instrument and predicted values are saved. In
the second stage, the women’s bargaining power variable is replaced by its
predicted value of the ﬁrst stage.

15. Estimates were also conducted by including the presence of younger
and older brothers and sisters, but due to a lack of observations, the
standard errors associated with the variable capturing the number of older
sisters increases substantially, resulting in nonsigniﬁcance of the variable
although the coeﬃcient remains constant at 0.1 (coeﬃcients of the variable
number of younger sisters is lower at 0.07) which suggests that this
explanation might be plausible.

16. Unfortunately for quantiles lower than the 18th and greater than the
89th the maximum likelihood estimation for the IV model did not
converge due to the small number of observations within these ranges.

17. An overidentiﬁcation test is used in overidentiﬁed equations (i.e.,
when the number of instruments is greater than the number of endogenous
variables)
to test whether the excluded instrumental variables are

independent of the error terms and can be considered as valid. The test
is conducted by regressing the residuals from the IV regression on all
instrumental variables. The nonrejection of the null hypothesis leads to the
conclusion that the overidentifying restriction is valid. The overidentiﬁ-
cation test used is the Hansen’s J test, which is the appropriate
overidentiﬁcation test when one has clustered SE.

18. Detailed results are available from the authors.

19. Variables include the distance to paved road, presence of electricity,
quality of care in the closest primary health care facility, and distance to
the closest low-level and high-level provider.

20. Note that when the variable agricultural revenue was removed the
coeﬃcient of women’s bargaining power was 0.46 instead of 0.51.

21. When the largest multidimensional indicator Multidim that includes
all the variables presented in Appendix 1 in the MCA was used, the
coeﬃcient was 0.86, the F-stat was 5 and the overidentiﬁcation test P-value
was 0.31.

REFERENCES

Ahmed, M. (2006). Intra-household bargaining and investment in child

health. Mimeo.

Allendorf, K. (2007). Do women’s land rights promote empowerment and

child health in Nepal?. World Development, 35(11), 1975–1988.

Amankwaa, A. A. (1996). Prior and proximate causes of infant survival in
Ghana, with special attention to polygyny. Journal of Biosocial
Science, 28(3), 281–295.

Amankwaa, A. A. (2001). Polygyny and infant morality in Western
Africa: Evidence from Ghana. African Population Studies, 16(1), 1–13.
Bairagi, R. (1981). On validity of some anthropometric indicators as
predictors of mortality. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition,
34(11), 2592.

Becker, S., Fonseca-Becker, F., & Schenck-Yglesias, C. (2006). Husbands’
and wives’ reports of women’s decision-making power in Western
Guatemala and their eﬀects on preventive health behaviors. Social
Science & Medicine, 62(9), 2313–2326.

Beegle, K., De Weerdt, J., Friedman, J., & Gibson, J. (2012). Methods of
household consumption measurement through surveys: Experimental
results from Tanzania. Journal of Development Economics, 98(1), 3–18.
Behrman, J. R. (1997). Intrahousehold distribution and the family.

Handbook of Population and Family Economics, 1, 125–187.

Behrman, J. R., Pollak, R. A., & Taubman, P. (1995). From parent to
child: Intrahousehold allocations and intergenerational relations in the
United States. University of Chicago Press.

Beneﬁce, E., Chevassus-Agnes, S., & Barral, H. (1984). Nutritional
situation and seasonal variations for pastoralist populations of the
Sahel
(Senegalese Ferlo). Ecology of Food and Nutrition, 14(3),
229–247.

Berkley, J., Mwangi, I., Griﬃths, K., Ahmed, I., Mithwani, S., English,
M., et al. (2005). Assessment of severe malnutrition among hospital-
ized children in rural Kenya. The Journal of the American Medical
Association, 294(20), 2577–2578.

Briend, A., & Zimicki, S. (1986). Validation of arm circumference as an
indicator of risk of death in one to four year old children. Nutrition
Research, 6(3), 249–261.

Browning, M., Bourguignon, F., Chiappori, P. A., & Lechene, V. (1994).
Income and outcomes: A structural model of intrahousehold alloca-
tion. The Journal of Political Economy, 102(6), 1067–1096.

Cantrelle, P., & Locoh, T. (1990). Facteurs culturels et sociaux de la sante

en Afrique Sub-Saharienne. Les dossiers du CEPED n°10, Paris.

Caverivie´re, M. (1986). Incertitudes et devenir du droit foncier se´ne´galais.

Revue internationale de droit compare´, 38(1), 95–115.

Chen, L. C., Chowdhury, A., & Huﬀman, S. L. (1980). Anthropometric
assessment of energy–protein malnutrition and subsequent risk of
mortality among preschool aged children. The American Journal of
Clinical Nutrition, 33(8), 1836.

Dalton, J. T., & Leung, T. C. (2011). Why is polygyny more prevalent in

Western Africa? An African slave trade perspective. Mimeo.

De Onis, M., Yip, R., & Mei, Z. (1997). The development of MUAC-for-
age reference data recommended by a WHO Expert Committee.
Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 75(1), 11.

Deaton, A., & Zaidi, S. (1999). Guidelines for constructing consumption
aggregates for welfare analysis. Princeton, Woodrow Wilson School—
Development Studies.

DeJanvry, A., & Sadoulet, E. (2004). Organisations Paysannes et De´ vel-
oppement Rural Au Se´ne´ gal. Berkeley: Universite´ de Berkeley, Banque
mondiale.

Demographic and Health Survey (2006). Enqueˆte De´mographique et de
Sante´ 2005 au Senegal: Rapport de synthe`se. Calverton: Macro
International.

Desai, S., & Alva, S. (1998). Maternal education and child health: Is there

a strong causal relationship?. Demography, 35(1), 71–81.

Dettwyler, K. A. (1986). Infant feeding in Mali, West Africa: Variations in

belief and practice. Social Science & Medicine, 23(7), 651–664.

Blumberg, R. L.

(1989). Making the case for the gender variable.

Diouf, M. (1990). Le Kajoor au XIXe sie`cle. Pouvoir ceddo et conqueˆte

Washington, DC: AID.

Booth, A. L., & Kee, H. J. (2009). Birth order matters: The eﬀect of family
size and birth order on educational attainment. Journal of Population
Economics, 22(2), 367–397.

Brahmbhatt, H., Bishai, D., Wabwire-Mangen, F., Kigozi, G., Wawer,
M., & Gray, R. H. (2002). Polygyny, maternal HIV status and child
survival: Rakai, Uganda. Social Science & Medicine, 55(4), 585–592.

Briend, A., Wojtyniak, B., & Rowland, M. G. (1987). Arm circumference
and other factors in children at high risk of death in rural Bangladesh.
The Lancet, 330(8561), 725–728.

coloniale. Paris: Editions Karthala.

Diop, A. B. (1985). La famille Wolof: Tradition et changement. Paris:

Editions Karthala.

Duﬂo, E. (2003). Grandmothers and granddaughters: Old age pension and
intra-household allocation in South Africa. The World Bank Economic
Review, 17(1), 1–25.

Duﬂo, E., Glennerster, R., & Kremer, M. (2007). Using randomization in
development economics research: A toolkit. In T. P. Schultz, & A. S.
John
(Vol. 4,
pp. 3895–3962). Elsevier.

(Eds.). Handbook of development

economics

THE EFFECT OF WOMEN’S BARGAINING POWER ON CHILD NUTRITION IN RURAL SENEGAL

29

Duﬂo, E., & Udry, C. (2004). Intrahousehold resource allocation in Cote
d’Ivoire: Social norms, separate accounts and consumption choices.
National Bureau of Economic Research. Working Paper No. 10498.
Dramani, L. (2011). Poverty spatial polarization in Senegal. Journal of

Geography and Regional Planning, 4(12), 664–671.

Elder, H. W., & Rudolph, P. M. (2003). Who makes the ﬁnancial decisions
in the households of older Americans. Financial Services Review, 12(4),
293–308.

Friedberg, L., & Webb, A. (2006). Determinants and consequences of
in households. National Bureau of Economic

bargaining power
Research. Working Paper No. 12367.

Gage, A. J., Sommerfelt, A. E., & Piani, A. L. (1997). Household structure
and childhood immunization in Niger and Nigeria. Demography, 34(2),
295–309.

Gibson, M. A., & Mace, R. (2007). Polygyny, reproductive success and
child health in rural Ethiopia: Why marry a married man?. Journal of
Biosocial Science, 39(2), 287.

Glewwe, P. (1999). Why does mother’s schooling raise child health in
developing countries? Evidence from Morocco. The Journal of Human
Resources, 34(1), 124–159.

Gue´rin, I. (2008). L’argent des femmes pauvres: Entre survie quotidienne,
obligations familiales et normes sociales. Revue francßaise de socio-
e´conomie, (2), 59–78.

Gupta, M. D. (1987). Selective discrimination against female children in
rural Punjab, India. Population and Development Review, 13(1),
77–100.

Gupta, M. D. (1990). Death clustering, mothers’ education and the
determinants of child mortality in rural Punjab, India. Population
Studies, 44(3), 489–505.

Gyimah, S. O. (2003). Interaction eﬀects of maternal education and
household facilities on childhood diarrhea in Sub-Saharan Africa: The
case of Ghana. Journal of Health and Population in Developing
Countries, 1–17.

Gyimah, S. O. (2009). Polygynous marital structure and child survivorship
in sub-Saharan Africa: Some empirical evidence from Ghana. Social
Science & Medicine, 68(2), 334–342.

Habicht, J., Martorell, R., Yarbrough, C., Malina, R., & Klein, R. (1974).
Height and weight standards for preschool children: How relevant are
ethnic diﬀerences in growth potential?. The Lancet, 1(7858), 611–614.
Hall, G., Chowdhury, S., & Bloem, M. (1993). Use of mid-upper-arm
in nutritional assessment. The Lancet,

circumference Z scores
341(8858), 1481.

Hindin, M. J. (2000). Women’s power and anthropometric status in

Zimbabwe. Social Science & Medicine, 51(10), 1517–1528.

Hoddinott, J., & Haddad, L.

(1991). Household expenditures, child
anthropometric status and the intrahousehold division of
income:
Evidence from the Coˆte D’Ivoire. Research Program in Development
Studies, Woodrow Wilson School, Princeton University.

Jinadu, M., Ojofeitimi, E., & Osifor, E. (1986). Feeding patterns of
children with protein–energy malnutrition in Nigeria. Tropical Doctor,
16(2), 82–85.

Kevane, M., & Wydick, B. (2001). Social norms and the time allocation of
women’s labor in Burkina Faso. Review of Development Economics,
5(1), 119–129.

Kishor, S. (2000). Empowerment of women in Egypt and links to the
survival and health of their infants. In Harriet Presser, & Gita Sen
(Eds.), Women’s empowerment and demographic processes. Oxford
University Press.

Kuczmarski, R. J., Ogden, C. L., Grummer-Strawn, L. M., Flegal, K. M.,
Guo, S. S., Wei, R., et al. (2000). CDC growth charts: United States.
Advance Data, (314), 1.

Lambert, S., Ravallion, M., & Van de Walle, D. (2011). Is it what you
inherited or what you learnt? Intergenerational linkage and interpersonal
inequality in Senegal. World Bank Policy Research, Working Paper
No. 5658.

Maitra, P. (2004). Parental bargaining, health inputs and child mortality

in India. Journal of Health Economics, 23(2), 259–291.

Malhotra, A., Schuler, S. R., & Boender, C. (2002). Measuring women’s
empowerment as a variable in international development. In D.
Narayan (Ed.), Measuring empowerment. The World Bank.

McElroy, M. B.

(1990). The empirical content of Nash-bargained
household behavior. The Journal of Human Resources, 25(4), 559–583.
Ministry of Economy and Finance. (2004). Rapport de synthe`se de la

deuxie`me Enqueˆte Se´ne´ galaise Aupre`s des Me´nages (ESAM II).

Mulder, M. B. (1989). Marital status and reproductive performance in
Kipsigis women: Re-evaluating the polygyny–fertility hypothesis.
Population Studies, 43(2), 285–304.

Mullany, B. C., Hindin, M. J., & Becker, S. (2005). Can women’s
autonomy impede male involvement in pregnancy health in Kat-
mandu, Nepal?. Social Science & Medicine, 61(9), 1993–2006.

Munro, A., Kebede, B., Tarazona-Gomez, M., & Verschoor, A. (2010).
The lion’s share. An experimental analysis of polygamy in Northern
Nigeria. GRIPS Discussion Papers.

Murdock, G. P. (1967). Ethnographic atlas: A summary. Ethnology, 6(2),

109–236.

Nikie`ma, B., Haddad, S., & Potvin, L. (2008). Women bargaining to seek
healthcare: Norms, domestic practices, and implications in rural
Burkina Faso. World Development, 36(4), 608–624.

Ntozi, J., & Nakanaabi, I. (1997). The AIDS epidemic and infant and child
mortality in six districts of Uganda. Health Transition Review, 7, 189–206.
Pande, R. P. (2003). Selective gender diﬀerences in childhood nutrition
and immunization in rural India: The role of siblings. Demography,
40(3), 395–418.

Pilon, M., Seidou Mama, M., & Tichit, C. (1997). Les femmes chefs de
me´nage: Apercßu ge´ne´ral et e´tudes de cas. Me´nages et familles en
Afrique. Approches des dynamiques contemporaines, Paris, E´ tudes du
Ceped, (15), 167–191.

Quisumbing, A. R. (1994). Intergenerational transfers in Philippine rice
villages: Gender diﬀerences in traditional inheritance customs. Journal
of Development Economics, 43(2), 167–195.

Quisumbing, A. R., & De La Briere, B. (2000). Women’s assets and
intrahousehold allocation in rural Bangladesh: Testing measures of
bargaining power. International Food Policy Research Institute, Food
Consumption Nutrition Division.

Quisumbing, A. R., & Maluccio, J. A. (2000). Intrahousehold allocation
and gender relations: New empirical evidence from four developing
countries. International Food Policy Research Institute.

Rosenzweig, M. R., & Stark, O.

(1989). Consumption smoothing,
migration, and marriage: Evidence from rural India. The Journal of
Political Economy, 97(4), 905–926.

Schultz, T. P. (1990). Testing the neoclassical model of family labor supply

and fertility. The Journal of Human Resources, 25(4), 599–634.

Singh-Grewal, D., Macdessi, J., & Craig, J. (2005). Circumcision for the
prevention of urinary tract infection in boys: A systematic review of
randomised trials and observational studies. Archives of Disease in
Childhood, 90(8), 853–858.

Smith, L. C., Ramakrishnan, U., Ndiaye, A., Haddad, L., & Martorell, R.
(2003). The importance of women’s status for child nutrition in
developing countries, Vol. 131. International Food Policy Research
Institute.

Sow, F. (1996). Famille et loi au Se´ne´gal. Les Frontie`res mouvantes du
mariage et du divorce dans les communau-te´s musulmanes. Dossier
Spe´cial volume 1, 128.

Strassmann, B. I. (1997). Polygyny as a risk factor for child mortality

among the Dogon. Current Anthropology, 38(4), 688–695.

Svedberg, P. (1990). Undernutrition in sub-Saharan Africa: Is there a

gender bias?. Journal of Development Studies, 26(3), 469–486.

Sylla, S. N. (2001). Femmes et politique au Senegal: Contribution a`

la
re´ﬂexion sur la participation des femmes se´ne´galaises a` la vie politique de
1945 a` 2001. Universite de Paris 1—Pantheon-Sorbonne.

Lele, U. (1986). Women and structural transformation. Economic Devel-

Thomas, D. (1990). Intra-household resource allocation: An inferential

opment and Cultural Change, 34(2), 195–221.

approach. The Journal of Human Resources, 25(4), 635–664.

Le´pine, A., & Le Nestour, A. (2013). The determinants of health care
utilisation in rural Senegal. Journal of African Economies, 22(1),
163–186.

Thomas, D. (1994). Like father, like son; like mother, like daughter:
Parental resources and child height. The Journal of Human Resources,
29(4), 950–988.

Lundberg, S., & Pollak, R. A. (1996). Bargaining and distribution in

Thomas, D., Contreras, D., & Frankenberg, E. (1999). Distribution of

marriage. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 10(4), 139–158.

power within the household and child health. RAND.

Lundberg, S. J., Pollak, R. A., & Wales, T. J. (1997). Do husbands and
wives pool their resources? Evidence from the United Kingdom child
beneﬁt. The Journal of Human Resources, 32(3), 463–480.

Thomas, D., Strauss, J., & Henriques, M.-H. (1991). How does mother’s
education aﬀect child height?. The Journal of Human Resources, 26(2),
183–211.

30

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

Trowbridge, F. L., & Sommer, A. (1981). Nutritional anthropometry and
mortality risk. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 34(11), 2591.
Van den Broeck, J., Eeckels, R., & Massa, G. (1996). Validity of single-
weight measurements to predict current malnutrition and mortality in
children. The Journal of Nutrition, 126(1), 113.

Wamani, H., Astrom, A., Peterson, S., Tumwine, J., & Tylleskar, T. (2007).
Boys are more stunted than girls in Sub-Saharan Africa: A meta-analysis
of 16 demographic and health surveys. BMC Pediatrics, 7(1), 17.

Wamani, H., Tylleskar, T., Astrom, A., Tumwine, J., & Peterson, S. (2004).
Mothers’ education but not fathers’ education, household assets or land
ownership is the best predictor of child health inequalities in rural
Uganda. International Journal for Equity in Health, 3(9).

Woldemicael, G. (2010). Do women with higher autonomy seek more
maternal health care? Evidence from Eritrea and Ethiopia. Health Care
for Women International, 31(7), 599–620.

World Health Organization, & UNICEF. (2009). WHO child growth standards

and the identiﬁcation of severe acute malnutrition in infants and children.

APPENDIX 1. WOMAN’S POWER SECTION IN THE

SURVEY QUESTIONNAIRE

The section includes 11 questions that were asked to the fe-
male married respondents and one question that was ﬁlled in
by the interviewer.

APPENDIX 2. CONSTRUCTION OF WOMEN’S

BARGAINING POWER USING MULTIPLE
CORRESPONDENCE ANALYSIS (N = 758)

Categories

Weight Contribution

to index

No
Yes

Have you worked during the last 12 months?

 0.621 0.03
0.014
0.281
Who makes decision on woman’s health?
1.514
0.129
0.61
0.028
 1.108 0.145

Respondent alone
Respondent and husband
Husband alone

Who makes decision concerning the visit of respondents’
relatives?

Respondent alone
Respondent and husband
Husband alone

1.455
0.105
0.762
0.054
 1.132 0.188

Does the respondent can go out without any permission?

Yes
It depends where she goes
No

Percentage explained by dimension

1.456
0.052
0.979
0.099
 1.129 0.155
72.71

Dimension
Respondent Economic

Question
Q1. Have you worked during the last 12 months? 1: Yes, 0: No
Q2. How much does your income make up in
total household income?
Q3. What is the share of total household
expenditures that you control?

Code

Decision-power Q4. Who usually makes decisions concerning

your health?
Q5. Who usually makes decisions concerning the
health of children?
Q6. Who usually makes decisions concerning the
schooling of children?
Q7. Who usually makes decisions concerning
daily expenditures?
Q8. Who usually makes decisions concerning
large expenditures of the household?
Q9. Who usually makes decisions concerning the
food cooked every day?
Q10. Who usually makes decisions concerning
the visit to your relatives?
Q11. Can you go out without the permission of
your husband?

Q12. How did the husband react during the
interview?

Mobility

Interviewer

1: Nothing, 2: Less than half, 3: Half, 4:
More than half
1: Nothing, 2: Less than half, 3: Half, 4:
More than half
1: The respondent, 2: Both spouses, 3:
Husband alone, 4: Another person
1: The respondent, 2: Both spouses, 3:
Husband alone, 4: Another person
1: The respondent, 2: Both spouses, 3:
Husband alone, 4: Another person
1: The respondent, 2: Both spouses, 3:
Husband alone, 4: Another person
1: The respondent, 2: Both spouses, 3:
Husband alone, 4: Another person
1: The respondent, 2: Both spouses, 3:
Husband alone, 4: Another person
1: The respondent, 2: Both spouses, 3:
Husband alone, 4: Another person
1: Yes, 2: depends where I go, 3: No

1: Husband was absent, 2: Husband said
nothing, 3: Husband said something
quietly, 4: Husband said something
violently, 5: Husband answered for his
wife

