Choosing between African  and  French  Destinations:

The  Role  of  Family  and  Community Factors  in Migration

from  the  Senegal  River  Valley

Sally  E.  Findley

Rockefeller  Foundation

Choosing between African  and  French  Destinations:

The  Role  of  Family  and  Community  Factors  in Migration

from the  Senegal  River  Valley

Sally  E.  Findley

Rockefeller  Foundation

February  1989

9

4

Choosing  between African  and French  Destinations:

The Role  of  Family and  Community Factors  in  Migration

from the  Senegal  River Valley

Sally. E. Findley

Rockefeller Foundation

M.I.T.  Inter-University Seminar on  International  Migration

Presented at  the

February 7,  1989

This  is  a substantially  revised version of  an  earlier  paper presented
at  the  African Population Conference  held in  Dakar,  November,  1988.
The  author wishes to thank Michel  Diawara and  Salif  Sow  for their
assistance  in  conducting the  in-depth case  studies  and  her
collaborators Nassour  Ouaidou and  Dieudonne Ouedraogo  at  the Sahel
Institute for their  contributions to  the research and  for the comments
leading  toward this  revision.  She also wishes  to thank John  Harris
and Allan  Hoban  at Boston University  for  helpful  comments they  made on
the  earlier paper.

1

4

The Upper Senegal  River  Valley stretching  from Matam, Senegal  to

Diamou, Mali  is  one of  the more  underdeveloped river  regions  of the western
Sahel.  Subject to  enormous  changes  in  level  between the  dry and wet  seasons,
at  least  until  the  recent construction of  two major  dams,  it has  never
supported a year-round  river transportation network.  In  addition,  most of  its
length passes  through rough terrain  unserved by  railroad  or adequate road
service,  and  it  remains  largely  inaccessible to  the outside  world.

In  part  associated with this  physical  inaccessibility, the  region  is

known as  one of  the  least  economically developed of  Senegal  or Mali,  where  the
bulk of  the population  living  in  the Valley are  located.  Although partially
served by  the  Dakar-Niger rail  line,  the region has  failed to  generate a
strong  set of  exports,  and  its economy  remains basically a subsistence
agro-pastoral economy  (Min. du Plan,  1985;  OMVS,  1980). 
inaccessibility of  the  region, loans  or other assistance to  develop  its
mineral  resources have passed over  the region.

Further, due  to the

Perhaps  due to  the  lack of  economic alternatives  in  the  region, the
Senegal  River Valley has  long been the  source of African labor  migrations.
Dating from  the  pre-colonial days when the river  served  as a major trade
route,  the  Soninke who  dominate the region  have been engaged  in trade,  both of
goods  such  as  gold or  arabic  gum, and of  people, slaves drawn  from the more
interior  regions.  The  taxation system imposed by the  French transformed the
existing trade patterns  into an  involuntary  system, where villages were
required to pay  the  head tax, with  payment  enforced by the  threat of  forced
labor  on the  construction of  the Dakar-Niger rail  line or  other colonial
public  works  projects.  As  it  was intended to do,  the  imposition of  the head
tax  drove many men out of  the Valley and toward  the newly established peanut
plantations where they worked each  season as  "navetanes."  In the  absence of
industrialization, those seeking cash  had few alternatives but to migrate.
With the worldwide drop  in  the prices  of arabic gum,  the shift  into migratory
circuits  was  further intensified  (Delaunay, 1984:  60-61). 
Though to  a lesser
extent,  the  Soninke also  left  the region to develop  commercial activities  in
other parts of  West Africa  (OMVS, 1980).  By the  1980s,  the men of  the Senegal
River Valley had had a century of  experience in circulatory migration, cycling
each year between the peanut crops or,  more recently,  the streets  of  Dakar,
and the  subsistence millet crops  in their home villages  (Adams, 1977;  Weigel,
1982;  Amselle, 1976).

Throughout this  period, however, there  is  little evidence  that  this

seasonal migration was viewed as  beneficial  in the  long  run for  their
families.  Rather, it  only just  barely served to meet the  cash requirements of
the  colonial governments  (Adams, 1977;  Weigel,  1982). 
families were perpetually threatened by  the fall  in peanut  prices,  which in  a
single season  could cut by one-fourth the demand for their  labor, as  in  1932
(Delaunay, 1984:  70).  There  existed a ready group of  men who  eagerly sought  an
alternative to  the gruelling life of  a  "navetane."  Like  other Africans under
French  domination, the  Soninke  served  in the  French army during the  Second

The  men and their

2

World  War,  and  many  of  these  "anciens  combattants"  decided  to  visit 
take advantage of  the  opportunity to  be readily  employed  in  postwar France.  Ir
the  late  1950s when the  reports  began filtering back to the  region  of  the
favorable  wage and  employment  situation, there were massive  shifts  in  the
migration away from Africa and  toward  France.  The number of  immigrants  in
France rose  sharply,  and by  the  late  seventies,  one survey  of  families  living
near Bakel,  Senegal  showed that  approximately one-half  of  all  migrants had
gone to  France  (Weigel, 1982:  26).

France  to

France had  clearly become the  preferred destination for migrants  from

the Senegal  River Valley.  Despite  the  restrictive  immigration laws  institutec
in  1974,  in  1975 the  census  enumerated 32,865  migrants  from Mali,  Senegal  and
Mauritania,  the three  countries comprising  the Senegal  River Valley. By  1981
the  number of  Senegal  River Valley migrants  who had officially registered witb
their  consular  offices  as resident  in France  numbered 40,593  (Conde and
Fleury-Brousse, 1983:  134-137).  The  actual  number of Valley migrants working
in  France  is  expected  to  be much higher  than  either of  these  figures,  due  to
underreporting  in the  census  and to  underregistration  at  the  consular offices.
The  restrictions on  immigration since  1974  and additionally  tightened in  1981
are a  significant factor blocking  migration, yet thousands  go each  year.  How
do  they manage  to  get  to  France anyway?  Where do  the other  men go who  do  not
succeed  in  going to  France?

In  this paper,  the men  who migrate  to France  are  contrasted with those

who go  to African  destinations.  The  analysis concentrates  on  the differences
in the  families and  communities  involved  in the alternative migrant circuits,
consistent with earlier  analyses of migration  patterns,  especially
international  migration patterns, that  family and community factors  determine
the patterns of  migration adopted by members of  the  impoverished  peasantry
(Weist, 1973;  Wood, 1981;  Roberts,  1982;  Findley,  1987;  Bilsborrow et  al.,
1987;  Minvielle,  1985).  Are the  families that have placed migrants  in  France
simply continuing a well-established tradition,as the historical  perspectives
of  Delaunay  (1984)  suggest, or  are there other significant  features  of  their
socio-economic situation that  shunt their members  into  the more difficult and
risky  French circuit?  Is  such  migration the migration  of  an conservative
elite,  as  the work of  Minvielle suggests  (1985:  228-230),  or is  it the
migration of  a group which has  fewer options, who may  seek  to change their
situation  through the migration process?  Studies  of migrants who move
internal  to  the African  continent generally portray  these migrants as  the
disadvantaged who have no choice but  to move  to  look  for work or  land
(Fieloux, 1980;  Coulibaly, Gregory and Piche,  1980),  yet we do not  know  if
this  is the  case for the  people  of the  Valley.  One  study of  Toucouleur
migration to African destinations  shows that  it  is  these migrants, and  not  the
migrants to France, who- invest  their  savings  in agricultural  improvements
(Minvielle, 1985),  surely  not the usual  practice  of the  economically
disadvantaged. Do the  migrants to France come from  the more  economically
disadvantaged villages, or  do  they come from villages with enough development
that the  cash sent back by the migrants  is  used to  further commercialize the
economy?  Do  the migrants  come  from the  most drought-prone areas,  where  it may

3

9-

be viewed as  pointless to  invest  a son's time  in  agriculture when  he could be
earning  money in  France,  or  from those  where  the periodic droughts  hit less
severely, where either the migrants'  savings  can be  invested at  less  risk  in
agricultural  improvements or  the migrants'  family  is  at  less  risk for  disaster
during the  long  intervals between  return visits?  These  are the questions  that
will be  addressed in  this  paper.

By  studying the differences  between these two  groups of  migrants we  hope

to be  able  to  identify the ways  that changes  in the development process,
either actual  or planned, are  likely to  affect  subsequent migration patterns.
Because  the migration  levels from  the region are  so high, with the  average
number of  current  migrants per household  in  1982  at  1.5  and  fully  42%  of  the
families  having had  at  least  one member  in France  at some  time  in  the past,
development programs  in  the  near  future  are  not likely to  stop migration
totally, but with better  understanding of  the dynamics  of  the  choices between
the two  migration circuits,  French  and African, we hope  to  identify the policy
levers  which might tip the  scales  more towards  African than  French migrations,
a shift  agreed as  desirable by the  French  and  regional  governments  (Conde and
Diagne,  1986.)

METHODOLOGY

* 

With  the  goal  of  identifying the underlying  family and  community

processes that  lead to the  placing of  sons  in  France,  as  compared  to Africa,  a
different type  of  study  is  needed than the kind previously  undertaken  in  the
zone.  The  existing  studies  either  concentrate on  a handful  of  villages where
the  full  diversity of migration  experience  is  not  covered or they  focus  on
only  the  flows  to  France,  neither  of  which  elucidates  the  differences between
the families  and communities  that might have  lead to migration to Africa, as
compared  to France.  If we  assume  that the men who end  up in  France  as
compared to Africa  are playing distinctly different roles  in  their families'
strategies  for  survival  and getting ahead in  the world, then we  must study
enough  communities  and families  that  the diversity of  patterns  is  covered.

In  order to  address  this diversity,  in  1982 a major South-North

migration study was  conducted  jointly  by the OECD Development Centre and
the  Sahel  Institute of  CILSS.  The study  started with a survey of
Senegalese, Malians,  and Mauritanians working in the  two major  immigrant
catchment areas  of  France, Paris  and the  Seine Maritime regions.  This
survey  covered 1219  individuals,  or  14%  of  the  "authorised" residents  from
the Senegal  River Valley.  As  part  of  this  survey, the migrants were asked
to give  their places of  origin, and based on the places  enumerated, a
second  sample  was drawn  in  99  villages  in the three countries  of  origin.
The sample  included three strata of  villages:  those  from which  20  or more
migrants had been enumerated in  the French  survey, those with only a few
(1-19  respondents),  and those with no  respondents, added in to represent
villages with a presumably  low level  of  French emigration.  The 99  selected
villages were stratified by size  and different  sampling fractions were used
in  each  size group to  obtain a sample  of  approximately  100  individuals per

4

village.  Due to  larger households  than expected, the  sample  exceeded  the
target of  10,000, with the result that  the  survey  in the  Valley  included  a
total  of  12,558  individuals, coming  from  1032  households.  (For additional
details  on the sample design  and the survey  instruments, see  Conde and
Diagne,  1986:17-23  and the  Annex).

This paper presents  analyses solely  from the survey conducted  in the

Senegal  River Valley.  These data were collected using  four different
interview schedules:  household listing form which  included basic
demographic characteristics  and census-type migration questions;  head  of
household  interview which  focused on the economic  characteristics of  the
household unit;  migration histories  collected for each man over age  15  in
the household;  and  village characteristics questionnaire.

Because  we are  interested  in distinguishing the African and  the  Frenct

migration patterns, the  migration histories  for the  1581  men over  age  15
were used to  group them  into the  following migration categories:

1)  Nonmigrant:  No  migration with  a duration greater than  6 months
2) Africa migrations  only:  All migrations  in  the  African continent
3) French migration:  One  or  more migrations to  France

This  information was  then  added to  the  information from  the truncated
migration histories for all  adult males  of the household to categorize  the
household by  its migration pattern:  No recent  migrations, Recent migrations
to Africa, Recent  migrations  to France.  Recent migration is  defined as  a
departure within the  five years preceding  the interview  in  1982.  The
different measures  of migration are  given in Table  1.

As  the data  for households  and communities was  collected only  at  the

1982  date of  the  interview,  in  order to  conduct an  analysis  of  the
household and community differences underlying the  alternative migration
patterns we restrict the migration to a recent period  and assume  that the
household and  community characteristics  observed in  1982  were comparable at
the date of  migration.  Therefore, the analyses  are  restricted to
migrations within the  five  years previous to the date  of  the  interview.
With this narrower period  for eligible migrations,  we need only assume  that
the pattern of  differences  (not the  absolute  levels)  between households  and
communties of  the different migrant groups remained roughly constant
throughout the  five-year period.  Several factors  argue  for the
plausibility of this assumption. First, the period under consideration was
not a period of  severe  drought, so we do not  risk the major local
perturbations  to agricultural and  economic  situations that might have
occured  in such a period.  Indeed,  observers of  the  region agree that  the
1978-82  period was  fairly  stable, as far  as crops and revenues  are
concerned.  Second, with a 7.7 year average  length of  stay  in France,  a
five  year peirod  is  too short for migration  itself to have  produced
significant  changes  in the  family's  living  standards.  Third, we are
studying household, not individual,  differences,  and existing ethnographic
material underscores the conservative nature of the  Soninke  household, the
dominant  ethnic group of  the  region  (Pollet and Winter, 1971).

5

The material  from  the 1982  survey was  supplemented by  in-depth

interviews  conducted  in  1987  with 71  families  in  seven  of  the  39  Malian
villages  in  the original  1982  sample.  The  villages were  chosen as  being
representative  of  all  the villages  in  the  sample which had  aggregate
proportions  of  temporary or  permanent  migrants significantly  higher or
lower  than  the  average  for all  the villages  in the  1982  survey.  This
material  is used to  introduce the different  patterns of  migration included
in  this  study.

These  data are used  in  three ways to  explore  the  family  and community

factors  structuring the  migration choices  of  the men  of  the region.  First,
the  1987  case  study material  is  used to  introduce  the  alternative migrants
and  their families.  Second,  the 1982  data are used to examine  the
differences  between the various  migrant categories.  Third, regression  is
used to  estimate the parameters  of  the models  for predicting  the propensity
for household members  to migrate  and the choice  between French and African
destinations.

PORTRAITS OF ALTERNATIVE MIGRANTS

The  1982  survey of migrants  in  France showed that the  61%  were  from
Mali,  28%  were  from Senegal,  and the  remaining  11%  were  from Mauritania.
Although  the  migrants  reported starting  to  arrive in  France  as  early as  the
1950's  decade, three-quarters arrived  in the  1970s decade.  The  strength of
the  attraction to  France  is  evidenced by the  fact  that over half  (51%)  of
the migrants  surveyed had  arrived after  the  imposition of  the  1974
migration  restrictions  (Conde and  Diagne,  1986:  84-6).

The average  length  of stay  in  France was  7.7  years,  but  this  stay  is

broken up by visits  to  the village.  The  first return visit occurs after an
average  of  five years,  long  enough  for the migrant to  find a  job, earn
enough  to pay off  the cost of  his voyage, and save enough  to bring  a
substantial  sum back with him.  After that  visits  occur on  average  every
three years.  The emigrant generally  stays one  to six months using up
accrued  vacation and  then returns to  his work.  In this way, migration to
France  for  many becomes  a working-life migration, with  definitive return
only when the  migrant retires  (Conde and Diagne,  1986:  87-92).

This  pattern of  migration to  France, either directly  or  in  stages with a

stop of  2-3  years  in  Dakar or  Ivory Coast to  earn money  for the passage,
was  found among  13.9%  of  the men  interviewed  in  1982.  In  the  1987  case
studies we  encountered  a returned migrant who reflected this  dominant
sequence  of  migration  directly  to  France:

It was  during a dry  year, in  1962,  that  I decided that migration would
be  better than staying here with  the  family.  At that time,  it was
relatively easy  to  enter France  and one  could  earn  a  lot.  Also,  my
older brother was there  and  he wanted  me to come.  So,  I decided  to go

6

to  Paris.  My older brother  sent me  a ticket,  and  I went  straight by
train  from Kayes  to  Dakar and  then  from Dakar to  Marseilles  by boat,
finally arriving  in Paris  by  train.  When  I arrived,  I stayed with my
older brother  and began asking  for work at  factories.  After one
month, I  found a  job sweeping  floors.  Since then,  I have worked  in  a
plastic bucket  factory  and  am currently at a bronze  factory.  In the
early days, I used to send  money back by postal  money  order, but now  I
send  it back with  other family members.  After my  first two  visits
(which were  after 8 and  5 years  of work)  I have returned  home  for the
cultivating season each two  or  three years.  I have  no difficulty
returning to  France,  because  I have  my residence  card.

Migration to France  is  clearly a family matter.  These migrations are
viewed  as a means  for the  family to  capture  some of  the  wealth of  its youth,
which  is  otherwise difficult with the  extremely low  levels of  agricultural
production  or economic  diversity in the region.  The young men go  to  France  to
earn  money to send back  to their natal  family  and in  order  to marry and
establish  their own  family.  Even  if  in actuality  the migrations may span a
period of  one  or  two decades,  they are  never viewed as  permanent.  Rather,
they are a modified  form of  target migration whereby the  migrant is  free  to
return  after he  has  attained certain  goals  for himself  and his  family.  Not
surprisingly,  savings  from  work in  France  are generally used for  the benefit
of  the  family, e.g.  improvement of  housing or  purchase of  wives,  and much less
frequently  for agricultural  implements. When savings  are  used  for productive
investments,  the pattern of  investment  is  much more  likely to  be  in
development of  tertiary enterprises than  in  agriculture  (OMVS, 1985).

Perhaps  because  it  is  the family  and not the migrants  who reap the

benefits of  their migration, there  are contrary attitudes  toward migration to
France.  The wives recognize  that if  they want to  have a more secure  economic
existence, they have to encourage  their husbands to  go to France.  While the
men  also  recognize this  financial  imperative,  they are  almost  universal in
saying that migration  is  a bad thing, because  it  keeps  them away  from their
family.  Nonetheless, they say  they will  encourage their sons  to leave  if
there  are no opportunities to  earn money in the village.  The  men  say that  if
their  sons  must  leave,  they would prefer they go to  France where they at  least
will  earn enough  to be  able to marry and establish  themselves. 
families  evidence a  love-hate attitude vis  a vis migration to  France.

Thus,  the

In  contrast, migration to Africa  is  in  many ways  simpler.  It  involves

less  planning and financial  risk, and  is often undertaken as  a stop-gap
measure  at the end of the cultivation  season when a poor harvest reveals  the
need to supplement the  family's  income with additional  earnings.  Whereas a
migration to France cannot be  orchestrated spontaneously, the migrations to
Africa  can and  are, as  the  following case  illustrates.

In 1983,  the harvest was very poor,  and our  income was very low.  I
had a wife and  two children,  and I felt  I had to go  in order to  bring
them back money  for food.  I decided  to go  to Manantali  (where a large

7

0'

dam was  under construction),  because  it  was  close and  I could quickly
return  with something for  my family.  I would not have  minded going
somewhere else, but  this was  also the only place  to which  I could
afford to  go.  In  fact,  it was  my wife who paid my train  fare.  I was
fortunate to  get a ride  from  the train  station to  the  dam  site,  and
went  to stay with an acquaintance from my village.  For  15  days,  I
went to  the construction site and  asked the  foreman  for work.  The
food  I had brought with me  ran out.  Just to  have a  little something,
I began gathering  straw to sell  for roofing.  Finally,  I found work
helping out the bricklayers.  I worked for three  months before
returning to  cultivate my  fields.  I sent back to  my wife half  my
salary each month,  and when  I returned  I was able  to  pay  the taxes,
buy some clothing  for the  family,  and buy enough  food  to last until
the  next harvest.  I will  not migrate again,  because  I must  take care
of  my wife  and children.  Migration isn't good:  If  it were not  for
the  lack of  food which pushes  the  head of the  family to  leave, nothing
would separate  him from  his wife  and  family.

In  the  1982  survey,  23%  of  the men  had migrated  only within the

African continent.  Where  did they go? For  the migrants  who have moved
within Africa only, 71%  first  moved to  another  location within the  Sahel,
with  fully half going  to Senegal.  The remainder went primarily to coastal
West Africa  on their  first move.  77%  of  the migrants on  the African
circuit  returned home  to stay  after this  first migration,  while another 17%
migrated  again within  the Sahel  and  6% went to other  parts  of Africa.  Only
9%  of  the migrants moving within Africa moved a third  time,  and most  of
these moves  again were  made  within the Sahel.

The migrants  who have  only  circulated between African destinations

fall  into  two  groups:  those who  have migrated each season,  returning each
rainy  season to cultivate  their  own fields,  and those  who migrated  without
returning each season.

The 1987  interviews  show  that the migrants  who migrate only  seasonally

are poorer and  lack the means  to finance  long-distance migration.  They go
during the  dry season to  earn  enough for their  taxes or other cash
necessities, but  they remain primarily farmers,  deriving most  of  their
needs from their own  agricultural  activities.  Typically, the  seasonal
migrants would prefer not  to migrate  again, and they do not consider
migrating to France.

Family  structure and responsibilities also  constrain the migration

choices of these men.  As  several  men indicated, if  one  is  the  sole adult
male  in a household, long distance and long duration migration to Francye
is  out of  the questions, as the  man  is  obliged to be present every rainy
season  to cultivate food for the  family.  Although women may help with the
planting and weeding of the millet  fields,  only men  are accorded millet
fields  by the village head  and only men actually  till  the soil  for the
planting of  the millet  (Pollet and Winter,  1971:  396).  Thus, without  a man

8

present  at  the  time that  the crops  are  sown, the  family has  no  means to
raise subsistence  food crops.

The  youth who  lack  the  family resources  to  go  to France  yet who  are

not  obliged to  return to help  cultivate the  millet  crop each  year are  the
ones  who  at  least have the  option to  go to  Dakar, Abidjan  or Bamako to  seek
out  some form of more permanent  employment or  trade.  Not all  young men  in
this  situation will  go  to  the more  distant cities,  as  the ties  to the
family are  strong and many  young men prefer to  earn  relatively small  sums
as  agricultural laborers  or  haulers  than  to be  long absent  from  their
family.  Those that do go to  the distant  cities tend  to stay  longer away,
in  periods  of years  rather  than months.  They,  too,  stay with kin and  are
helped by kin to  find work.  If  they are  successful,  their work gives  them
the option  of  staying away  and making a life  for  themselves  in  the new
community.  Some  may  return to  marry, and others  may return  to take over
the role  of  household head when their  father  or uncle dies,  but  it  is  only
in  this  pattern of migration that one  finds the permanent emigrant. 
they return, they may continue  to  engage  in  trade activities,  and  they
appear to  be  more  likely to  achieve  some  upward economic mobility  as  a
result  of  their migration  than are  the  seasonal migrants. 
is  an  example  of  the migration  circuit  to regional  or African destinations.

The  following

If

In  1960  I wanted to  be independent.  I did not  want to work for  the
French, so  I decided to  go  into commerce.  First  I went to Kayes,
where  I earned my fare  by working for  a blacksmith.  Then,  I went  to
Koutiala,  where my uncle  worked.  He  lodged me,  and  I worked carrying
baggage  for one year.  Then,  I had enough saved to  start selling
cloth,  which I did as  an  itinerant trader until  1962.  In  1962,  I
started  taking livestock  from Mali  to be  sold  in the  Ivory Coast.  In
1963,  I went home  for a  short  visit, and then  again  in  1967  in order
to  marry and bring my wife back with me.  In  1974  I returned to  the
village  to care  for my ailing  father.  After his  death,  I stayed  in
the  village,  as  I became the  head of  the household.  Now, I have a
store  in  the village.  I  leave the  village only  periodically to go  to
Bamako  to  buy merchandise for my business.

The  last migration pattern  is  that  of nonmigration,  namely the

individuals who never have  left  for a period of  more than  six months.  Some
of  these may have migrated seasonally, but  in  the  1982  survey  these
temporary migrants  can not  be  distinguished from the  nonmigrants.  In  1982,
63%  of  the men interviewed  had never migrated.  The  case studies  of  1987
show that  this group is  a mixed bag:  Some  regret never  having migrated,  and
feel that  their life.is  more miserable than if  they had been  able to
migrate. 
on  brothers who have emigrated for assistance  during bad years.  And  some
consider  themselves  to be  doing well and  have  no desire to  migrate.  The
following  are the comments  of  this  latter  form of  nonmigrant:

Some are managing  fairly well,  but admit that  they  are dependent

I certainly do not  want to  leave.  What  I want are  a  cart and water

9

pump  (to irrigate  my vegetable garden).  With these  I could prove that
migration does  not  pay.  I think that  agriculture can  lead  to a better
life  than  emigration.

Consistent with the ambivalent attitudes  described above,  most  of  the

men say  they  have no  plans to migrate  in  the  future.  The  dream of
migration  and  its  view as  a positive factor  to  resolve life's  problems  is
reflected  in  the nonmigrants, who  with 39%  intending to migrate  reflect the
highest  level of  migration intentions. 
have  been  fairly  successful  and who  may be  pressured  to continue  to remit
money to  the  family are the next  most  likely to  plan  to migrate, with  12%
planning  another migration.  The African migrants are  the  least  favorable
to  subsequent  migrations, with  only 7%  of  the African migrants  consciously
planning  another migration.

The  French migrants,  many of whom

Where  do they plan  to  go?  France  is  the preferred destination  for all
the  men, with  19%  of  the  nonmigrants  and 8%  of the  men who already went to
France  saying they would go to  France.  4%  of  the men who had  never been  to
France  would  like  to try  France,  but otherwise,  there is  virtually no other
preferred destination for that group.  Some  (13%)  of  the  nonmigrants would
prefer Senegal  or Ivory  Coast to  France,  and there  is  a slight  interest  in
Gabon and central Africa  (6%).

THEORETICAL APPROACHES  TO  FAMILY MIGRATION DECISIONS IN  THE VALLEY

is 

is 

Studies  of  migration  from the  Senegal  River Valley have unanimously noted

the  Soninke  who  go  to  France,  while  it 

that  it 
who go to African destinations  (DeLaunay, 1984;  Weigel,  1984;  Minvielle, 1985;
OMVS,  1980).  But  what  is  it  about their ethnic  identity which propels  men
into  such different  circuits?  We believe that the underlying  structure of
their  families and of  the communities  in which they  find themselves  are the
underlying reasons  for  these migrations,  and if  we can  get  beyond the black
box  of  ethnicity we would  have  a clearer  identification of  the constraints
that might be  addressed by policies  responding  to  the  almost universal  desire
of  the  men to  stay home and not  spend their  lives  in  the  French migration
circuits.

the  Peul  or  Toucouleur

To do this,  we  adopt a family  perspective on migration, where migration

is viewed  as  part of  a  family's  strategy to maximize  family rather  than
individual  income.  Such a perspective  is  very compatible with the  patterns of
social  influence in  the Senegal  River Valley.  In this  region,  dominated by the
Soninke, the gerontocracy system is  still  strong, and younger persons  remain
under the authority of the  oldest, the head of  the  family, long  past the
customary  adolescent or  early adult years  (Minvielle, 1985;  Weigel,  1982).
Indeed,  it  is  not  only the  senior head of  the  family who must  approve the
migration plans  of a young man, but  if  he plans to  leave behind  a wife  and

10

children, he  must  also obtain the  approval of  his older brothers, who will
have  to take charge  of  his  family in his  absence  (Pollet and Winter,  1971:
376).

The  1987 case studies  confirmed  the continuation of  this  authority

pattern, particularly  for migration to  France  and further  showed the  direct
interest  the  family takes  in the migration  plans of  its  sons. 
the heads of  the family  show that  they consider migration more  as  a family
investment than a  chance  for the youth to  make their way  in the  world.  The
process of  migration to France, viewed  as  the migration with the highest
potential payoff  for the  family,  was carefully  orchestrated  in such a manner
as to  maximize  the chance  that the young man would  find a  suitable place  to
work.  Older brothers and cousins  spent  a long  time trying to  find work for
their  younger relations,  and  it  is  the  family which collectively  raises the
money to  send the  "chosen one"  off  to  France.

Responses by

Even for men going  to African destinations,  the  family concerns  continue

to be  dominant,  but  in a different way than  among the  families  attempting to
send  sons  to  France.  Among the  families  sending men  to Ivory Coast or  Dakar,
for example,  the search  for  immediate cash  for  the  family could be heard
repeatedly as  the major motive  for young  men to  leave.  The  cash  imperatives
pushing this  migration are much more salient  than  for the  families  considering
the long-term strategy  of  sending men  to  France, however,  and  this should  be
reflected  in differences  in  the way migration  is  integrated  into  the household
reproduction and  production processes.  As  in  Latin American  societies, the
family's  strategy  in African migration is  much more one of  survival,  while
that of  French migration is  upward socio-economic mobility  (Urzua, 1981).

If we are  to predict the type  of  family migration decision, therefore,

we must  understand the  ways that  family and community  constraints  operate to
place families  in  situations where their survival  concerns dominate, versus
those where a  long-range view is  possible and  a strategy to  advance  the
family's  fortunes becomes  feasible.  Based on  what we have observed  among the
families in  the region, we believe  that the  fundamental distinction  is
evidenced  in the  choice between migration to France and migration to Africa,
with the migrations  to  France indicating a mobility strategy  and the African
migrations indicating a survival  strategy.

The different family and community  factors expected  to  influence  this

choice are given  in Table 2, and their measures are given in  Table  3.
In this  research the  household compound is  the definition of family used.
Although 12%  of  the members are  nonkin, these  individuals, usually  foster
children, share meals and  sleeping quarters  with the  family and they  live  and
work with the family, hence they are considered as  if  they were  members  of the
family by the household head.  The village  is  the unit of  community.

Previous research has  shown  that members  of the  Soninke  ethnic group

are more  likely to migrate to France,  and we do not expect our findings to

11

4

contradict  this  pattern.  Where we  differ, however,  is  in  the expectation that
controls  for  the appropriate household  and community  factors underlying
migration will  reduce  the influence  of  ethnic membership.

At  the  household level,  families  which have more human  resources  are

expected to be more  likely to  send one  of  their  sons abroad  to  France.  There
are  several  measures  of the  higher  level  of  human resources.  Families  at  a
later  stage  in their  lifecycle,  i.e.  with  an older head,  have had a longer
period in  which to establish  their authority in the  village, are  likely  to
have control  of  more  land, and are  more  likely to  have access  through the
extended kin  network to  extrafamilial  resources that can  be  applied to  the
cost  of  sending  a migrant  to  France  (Minvielle, 1985;  Pollet  and Winter,1971:
375-6).  Polygynous  families  also  increase the network of  potential  supporters
for  funding migration, but they also  play another positive  role, namely
increasing the  pool of  support  available to the  wife and  children of  the
absent migrant.  Larger  households  and a greater number  of men,  usually but
not  always  associated with polygynous  structures,  may facilitate  the
departure, because the man may  leave  without  jeopardizing the  subsistence
production of  the  family, a contributing factor in  another major  South-North
migration  flow  (Weist, 1973).  A  larger number of  men also gives  the  family
access  to  more  crop  land,  as plots  are allocated to  each  adult male member of
the  family.  The  availability of previously  migrant kin to obtain  visas,
purchase  airline tickets,  and to support  the  new immigrant  until he  has  found
a  job also are  expected  to  increase  the  likelihood of  a decision  to  go  to
France  (Tilly and  Brown,  1967;  Graves  and Graves,  1980).  Finally,  the
families  where there has been an  investment in  human resource development, as
evidenced by headship by a  literate head, are also  expected to  be more  likely
to  send sons  to  France, as part  of  their  strategy  to  emphasize returns  from
human resources,  as  compared  to agricultural  resources  (Moock, 1973).

Economic  factors  are  likely to  constrain the  family's ability  to  send

The  very poorest  are not  expected to go  to France,  as  their  low

someone  to  France.  Given  the high cost of  migration to  France, well  over
$1000,  only  the  families with somewhat higher  levels  of  cash  income,  whether
from  remittances or  local  commerce,  will  be  able to  finance  migration to
France. 
level of  income and  low level  of agricultural  production would place in
jeopardy the survival  of  the  family left behind.  Only  those with more  than
the minimum  level  of  agricultural production  would be  able to  risk the
potentially lengthy periods when the  family has not  received anything from the
migrant in  France.  Thus, we hypothesize  a positive  effect of  the  level  of
nonremittance family  income on the  probability of  sending sons to  France.

As  part of  their  strategy for  upward economic mobility, the  families
sending men to  France are  likely to view the remittances  as capital  that can
be  invested in establishing commercial  enterprises  or development of  cash
crops  (Stark,  1981).  Thus, the  absence of  a means to  earn cash in  local
activities  would  be  another force driving  the  family towards  placing a member
in France.

12

The drive  for additional  cash with which  to  commence  commercial
activities may also  be viewed as  a  facet  of a  family strategy  to gain  a
foothold  in the  monetary economy.  The strategy of  upward economic  mobility
involves  developing  sources  of  income  that  are  perceived as  stable  and
relatively  isolated  from drought and other  local  economic vagaries.  Commerce,
a traditional  Soninke  activity has  long served  this  role,  and  in  the economy
of the  1980s  it  continues to  provide the  means by  which families can  insert
themselves  into  the world economy.  Families  interviewed  in  1987  agreed that
migration to France was  considered the most  efficacious, if not the  only,
manner by which to generate  enough capital  to  start their own  businesses.

Just  as  families can  be  viewed as having survival  strategies,

communities may view certain economic  strategies more  favorably than  others
(Caldwell, Reddy and Caldwell,  1985).  Communities which are  frequently  and/or
severely afflicted by drought  are less  likely to  view agriculture  as  their
most promising  route to development,  as the risk of  failure  is great  if  they
do  not devise  means  to  produce in  the  face  of drought.  In  these communities,
we expect that the  community will  tend to look  outward  to  external  sources  of
support  and will  attempt  to  diversify its  revenue base.  While migration to
Africa does not  offer the same  prospect to continue  to  be  rentable during a
severe  drought,  migration to  France does,  and  for this  reason we expect  that
the more drought-prone communities will be  more  likely to  send  their men to
France.

Development planners  for  the region  have assumed  that migration would

be curtailed by  creation of  a  commercialized agriculture through the
introduction of  small-scale irrigation and cash crops,  such as  rice,  bananas,
or market vegetables  (Adams, 1977;  OMVS, 1980;  Ba,  1987).  Cash  crops  and
irrigated agriculture  require resources and planning,  which would seem  in
scarce  supply  among the poorer  families concerned with  their day-to-day
survival.  Hence,  it  is  expected that the  presence of irrigation  and  cash
cropping would reduce  the  chance of  French migration,  but not  the migrations
to African destinations.

The  level  of  economic  diversity in  a community also  is  expected  to
increase the  chance that  families  of that  community will  send migrants  to
France.  Why?  Essentially,  this  follows  from the  logic of  a  strategy which
seeks  to decrease  the  dependence on  non-monetarized and erratic  subsistence
agriculture while  increasing the  degree to which the  community is  inserted
into the world economy.  In  such communities we expect a greater pressure on
the families  to develop outside  income-generating activities,  and migration to
France  is  clearly one  such linkage.  If we  take  as  a measure of  the community
insertion  into  the world  economy the presence  of commercial  activities and the
presence of  cash crop activities, we expect  the families  in  the more
economically diverse  communities to have  a higher probability of sending  their
sons  to France.  Further, we expect  that the better off  families will  be more
likely  to pursue this option  in the communities  already  inserted  into the

13

V

world economy,  all  else being  equal.  Hence,  we  expect  an  interactive  effect
of  the  community commercial  activities and  the  level  of  family non-remittance
income.

In  other migration  studies,  it  was  shown  that the more  accessible

communities  had higher  migration rates,  but we  do  not  expect access per  se  to
affect migration to France  (Brown et  al.,  1987;  Findley, 1987).  Accessibilitj
in  terms  of  better  road access  is  expected to  facilitate migration to Africa,
where  it  is  important that  the migrant be  able  to  leave  and return  easily and
frequently.  For  the  French migrations,  however, returns  are  seldom, so  road
access  is  not expected to  be  important.  However,  accessibility to  social
services  is  expected to  have  a positive effect  on  the probability that
families will  opt  for the French migration strategy  (Findley, 1987;  Bilsborrou
et  al.,  1987;  Brown and Sanders,  1981).  Because  of  the  low level  of  social
infrastructure  in  the region,  primary  schools  are about the  only social
service  that  is  present  in  sufficient numbers  at  or near the village  level.
Because  ready access  to  a large school  is  expected  to  increase  confidence  in
the  feasibility  of  the strategy of  investing  in non-agricultural  activities,  a
feature  of  the  French migration  strategy, we expect that  families  in
communities  with superior access to  schools will  be  more  likely  to  adopt  the
strategy.  Because  the variable of  school accessibility combines  both the size
of  the  school  and  its  accessibility, we do not separately control  for
accessibility.

Following earlier  work by  Findley  (1987)  and  Bilsborrow et  al.  (1987),

it  is  expected  that  families  living  in villages  with a high  level  of
emigration  will have  higher rates  of  migration than similar  families  living  in
villages with  lower levels of  migration.  In  the high migration villages,  each
family  is  likely to  know other  families  who have migrants  in France,  and from
these  families  they can  learn of migration possibilities and benefit from
financial  and social  support for their own  attempts to send  sons to France.
As  for  other reference  groups  (Merton and  Rossi,  1968),  the group of  families
with migrants  acts as  a socializing  agent for the  families  aspiring to
increase  their status  in  the same manner  (Findley, 1987).

Just as  membership  in the Soninke ethnic group can increase the  chances

that sons  are  sent to France,  families  living  in villages  dominated by  the
Soninke group may have  a higher probability  of  sending members to France.
This may be because  the Soninke villages have other structural features  which
collectively raise the  probability of  members' migration to France, and
whether or not the  individual  family is  Soninke,  all  families  in the village
will  experience these same  forces.  Again, we assume that controlling for the
relevant  household and  community factors  will  reduce this collective  effect,
however to the extent that there  are other unmeasured collective  factors
associated with the dominant ethnic  identity, we expect a residual  positive
effect.  In  addition, we expect an  interaction  effect, whereby the  Soninke
families will  experience  less  of  this collective  unmeasured  effect as  they
will  already have  experienced these residual  effects  at a household level.

14

HOUSEHOLD AND COMMUNITY CHARACTERISTICS ASSOCIATED WITH THE MIGRATIONS

Although  family and community structure are the  focus  of  this

research,  let us  start  by considering the  characteristics of  the men
themselves.  After  removing the  men  for whom  all  data  items  were  not complete,
we are  left with a sample  of  1460.  Because  unequal  fractions  were drawn  in
each  village, the  statistics pertaining to each  category of  migration were
calculated  after weighting the  individual  records to be  representative of  the
total  population of  the  99  villages.  The characteristics  of  the men by
migration category are  given in Table  4.

Compared to the migrants who  have been  absent  for  long periods or to

those who returned  after  earlier migrations, the recent migrants,  either  to
France  or  Africa are significantly younger, with an  average  age of  26-27,
compared to  the  37  years  for nonmigrants  and 45  plus years  for  the  returned or
long-gone migrants.  As  expected,  nine out  of ten of  the recent  French
migrants are  Soninke,  compared  to  only half of  the total  population.  Few of
the recent migrants  either to  France or Africa are heads of  household, a
strong  indication of  the  subordinate  role played by  the  actual migrants  in  the
family  migration strategy.  Indeed,  fewer than  1% of  the  recent  French
migrants  are heads  of  households.

Though generally the more  educated are  expected to migrate the  long

distances,  in this  case French  literacy plays almost  no distinguishing  role. 
If  anything, it  is  the  illiterate rather than  the  literate who are  selected
for migration to  France.  This  international migration  of  the  illiterate  may
be  seen as  consistent with  the view of  international  migration articulated  by
Portes  and Walton  (1981:  30),  where  the international  migrant  is  a  labor
migrant pulled  by the  international  order  to work as  cheap unskilled  labor,
where  educational  qualifications are  not as  important  as  the  ability of  the
migrant to  "self-transport" and  insert himself  into a  network wherein he  can
seek  an economic  niche  for himself.  While  educational qualifications  may not
be relevant  to  this search  vocational  training and  experience  is,  and the
recent migrants  to  France are more  likely  than any other group to be  artisans.

Migrants  to France  at any date  are more  likely to come  from polygynous

households:  51%  of  the recent  migrants  and  63%  of the  earlier migrants,
compared  to  32%  of  all households.  Their  families  average  18.5  and  20.3
members,  respectively, compared to the nonmigrants' average  household size  of
15.4.  The  differential  with respect to the average number of  men  in the
household  is  even more striking.  While the nonmigrants'  households average
3.1  men,  the households  of  the recent  migrants to  France  average  4.1  men, 133%
greater  in number.  They do not  necessarily have  a greater proportional  labor
force,  as the proportion working does  not  vary significantly between the
categories of  migrant households, but  it  is  clear that the human resource
element,  especially the  number of  men,  is  a contributing factor.

15

q

4

0

The  migrants generally have  lower per capita  nonremittance  annual
incomes  than  the migrants.  Contrary to  expectation,  however,  the recent
migrants  to  France  have  the  lowest  percapita  incomes,  11,586  F  CFA  or  $39  per
capita,  while the recent African migrants  have the next  lowest  levels,  19,085
F CFA or  $64  per capita,  both significantly  lower than  the average  level  of
31,119  F  CFA or  $104  for all  households.  On the surface,  it  appears  that
having low  income  pushes  families  to  send  sons  to  France rather than to
Africa.

While  the  families  with migrants to  France  have a smaller per capita

food deficit  than  the nonmigrants, their  deficit  is  greater than  the families
with migrants  to Africa.  While  the  nonmigrant-French migrant  food deficit
differential  is  in  the direction expected,  that between the  French and the
African migrants  is  not as  expected.

The statistics  pertaining to migration background  of  the household

clearly indicate  that the  French migrants are  drawn from the  most mobile
families.  They have the  largest  number of  current migrants,  the  largest
number of  relatives already  in  France,  and they have family experience with
migration  to  France.

The  community context of  the French migrants  as compared  to  the

community contexts of  the other  forms  of migration  are given in  Table  5.  The
pattern of  differences  in community  context are  roughly consistent with the
expectations  outlined  in  Table 2.  The migrants  to  France,  as compared to
those who go  to Africa,  do come  from villages with high  levels  of  temporary
and permanent migration and villages  dominated by the Soninke  ethnic group.
They are  in  the most accessible villages,  with only  14%  of  the  families  living
in villages  with no road  access.  Their  villages have better  access to primary
schools  and, to  a  lesser  extent, health units.

* 

The agricultural  and economic  differentials, however, do not

consistently conform to  our expectations.  Whereas  the  French migrants do  come
from the more  drought-prone villages  (59%  compared to  41%  in  the  total
sample),  the  level  of  agricultural development is  higher by two  of  the three
measures of  agricultural development  and no different on  the third.
The migrants to  France come from villages with have  both a higher  level of
food  self-sufficiency and irrigation  facilities  (all of  which existed in  the
villages prior  to the  1978 departure date  at the  beginning of the recent
migration period).  This  is  a relation exactly opposite our prediction.
Perhaps what  is critical  is  the use  of  the  irrigation facilities,  and the
complementarity between the  remittance income  and the  feasiblity of  conducting
irrigated agriculture.  These  results are consistent with another study of
small-scale  irrigation along the  Senegal River, where the remittances  from
French  migrants were necessary to pay water fees  and purchase  agricultural
inputs  (Diemer and van  der Laan,  1987).

The differences between  the French and the African migrants'

communities are  also  not what we  expected.  Compared to  the African migrants

16

the  families  sending  sons  to  France are  less  likely to  live  in communities
where there  are  cash crops,  but  there  is  no difference  in  level  between  the
French migrants  and the nonmigrants' villages.  And while  the  French migrants
come  from  villages with a level  of commercial  activities or  insertion
into a monetary  economy higher  than  for the nonmigrants,  the  differences are
not great,  and, more  importantly, the African migrants  come  from villages with
a similar  level  of  commercial  activity.

ESTIMATION OF THE  ALTERNATIVE MODELS  FOR MIGRATION CHOICES

While these  descriptive statistics portray  some  of the  differences between  the
households and  communities with  French versus African  migrants,  in order  to
test the  hypotheses  regarding the  underlying household and community
structures which are  associated with  the alternative migration choices,  we
must use  regression  estimates  to  control  for the simultaneous  influence  of  the
The  results of  the alternative models are
factors under consideration. 
presented  in  Tables  6,7  and 8.  Due to  simple  correlations exceeding  .40
between  family size  and  three of  the  other variables, the models  to not
include  family size,  since the  main effect of  family size  was  expected to
operate  through the  number of  men. 
measure  of  lifecycle  stage,  and Marriages  also had  a correlation  exceeding
.40.  Age  was  deleted, because the  polygynous  nature of  households  appeared to
better  reflect the  extensive ties to  other families  and  the building  up of
community power that are  expected to  affect  migration to  France.

In  addition,  age of  household head,  the

To provide some  perspective  on the families with versus  those without
migrants,  the  first  set of models  in Table  6 give  the  linear  regression
coefficients for  the prediction of  the number  of migrants currently  absent
from the  family  in  1982.  In the  first model  in  panel  (a) the  variable  for
household  ethnicity is  included,  and  in the second panel  both the household
and the dominant village ethnicity are  included.  These regressions  highlight
the increased explanatory power accorded to the village ethnicity, as  opposed
to the  household's ethnic  identity.  In the models with only the  household
ethnicity, the number of  current migrants from  the household is  significantly
higher  in  the case of  the households  belonging to the  Soninke  ethnic group.
However, when the village's  dominant ethnicity  is  included,  the  results
clarify the  role of  ethnicity.  After controlling  for the  other relevant
variables, ethnicity does  influence  the number of migrants  from a household,
but the village  ethnicity is more  important than the household's ethnic
identity.  Regardless of  their own ethnic  identity,  families living  in Soninke
villages have  a higher  level  of migration than  do other families.  Indeed,
once this  effect is  controlled, the  number of migrants  from  a household  is
lower  for the Soninke  families  than  for other  families.

What else can be learned  about the  household migration propensities  from

these  regressions?  Regardless of  ethnic  identity, the  migration context of
the family exerts a strong  influence  on their propensity to migrate.  Families
which have  already succeeded in placing relatives  abroad  are  likely to do  so
again, as  are  families  living in villages  with a high rate of  temporary and

17

(

permanent migration.  In  addition, the greater  the  number of men  in  the
family,  the greater the number  of  migrants.  This  effect can  be due  to the
replacement effect outlined above  or to  the size  effect  also embodied in  the
variable,  number of  men  in  the household.  Finally,  there  is  some  indication
that the  households in  the more  difficult economic  situations are  the ones
with the  greater number of migrants,  as  suggested by the negative  coefficients
on  the  variable  for nonremittance  income and  for  the  presence  in  the village
of  cash  crops.

While these regressions help to portray  the  situations of  families

that  tend  to have  a high  level  of  outmigration,  they do not  distinguish these
migrants by  their destinations.  The regression results presented  in the
remaining tables  show the interplay of  these  different factors  in  the choice
between  French and African  destinations for the recent migrants  from these
households.

Because  we are  interested  in  isolating the  effect of  ethnicity  from
other aspects  of  the  household and  community  situation, this  series  includes
five regressions, with  each regression  equation reflecting the  measurement of
ethnicity at  a  different level.  The  full  equations  are given  only for the
last  three  equations, while the  range of  changes between  the  five models  is
summarized in  Table  7.

* 

This  series  of  equations clearly  document the  importance of  ethnicity

for decisions  about migration to  France.  The equation with  both family  and
village  ethnicity  is  a  significantly better  fit than the model  with no
ethnicity variables.  However, as  for the prediction  of  the numbers  of  current
migrants  from  a household,  the role  of  ethnicity is  not the  same  as we  had
predicted.  When the other  family and community background  variables  are
included in  the fully  specified model,  the  family's  own ethnic identity  is  not
as  important as  its  location within  a community dominated by the Soninke.
Whether or not a  family  is  Soninke,  if  it  lives  in  a Soninke-dominated
village,  it  has  a significantly higher chance of  sending someone  to  France.
Indeed,  the  interaction  of the village  and  family  ethnicity variables
highlight the  lesser role  that  family  ethnic identity plays.  In  the villages
dominated by  the  Soninke group, the  importance of  their own  ethnicity is
reduced for  the  Soninke  households.

The  alternative logistic  regression estimates  for the  family's choice

of  France  over  Africa call  into question some  of  the  standard expectations
about why the men of  the Valley go to  France. 
community factors are  controlled the salience of  drought does not
significantly increase the odds  of  families  sending  sons  to France. 
the  level of harvest and presence of  irrigation are  significant predictors  in
the  incomplete equations, in  none  of these equations  are  the signs  in  the
hypothesized direction. 
communities with poor  agricultural  situations, e.g.  insufficient harvests and
no irrigation,  the  coefficients are  positive,  not negative.  Apparently,
migration to  France  is  not part  of the  community's overall  drought survival

Where  it was  expected that  families  living in

Once the  other family  and

While

18

strategy, nor  is  it  part of  the community's  traditional  mechanisms to  offset
poor  harvests.  Rather, the  communities appear  to use  migration to Africa  as
part  of  their drought and poor harvest coping repertoire.  More  families  send
their  sons  to  Africa  in the  poorer  farming communities with only  dry  farming
options,  while where  irrigation  is  possible  it  complements the  French
migration strategy.

At  a family  level,  however, there  is  some  merit to the  economic  "push"
thesis  for migration to France.  Compared to men who  go to Africa, the men who
go  to  France have  lower nonremittance  income,  as we  had  predicted. 
evidence  is  mixed regarding  family agricultural  productivity.  In several  of
the models,  the  families with a  larger  per capita  family  food deficit are more
likely to  send their sons  to  France than  to Africa,  contrary to our
hypothesis.  The combination  of  family and community  results regarding
agricultural  structure suggest  that  it  is  the worse  off  families  in the better
off communities who  send their  sons  to  France,  while  the converse,  the better
off  families  in  the worse off communities, opt  for Africa.

The

Schooling is  another variable  where the  family  and community results

differ.  We had  expected that  families that aspired to  the  non-farm world, as
measured by the  French  literacy of  the  head, would be  more likely  to  send
their  sons to  France,  but  in  no model  is  this variable  a  significant
predictor.  However,  access to  schools  is  a predictor  of  the  French migration
pattern  in  all  but  the  final model  with the  interactions.  These results  are
suggestive that going to  school but  not actual  learning may be  a  factor  in
facilitating French migrations.

Community economic diversification and insertion  into an external

monetary economy, as  measured by  the presence of  commercial  activities, also
affects the  choice of  France over Africa.  In  the models  without the
interactions,  the  men  in the villages  with commercial  activities  are  more
likely  to  go to France,  as  hypothesized.  But when the  interaction of  the
family  nonremittance income  and the  presence  of  commerce  is  included  in  the
model,  the coefficients  show that  the  influence of  commercial  activities  is
principally due  to  a heightening of  the negative family  income effect,
consistent with our prediction. Where  there are  few commercial  activities,
families with  low income are  even more  likely to  send  their sons  to France.
The presence of  the  commercial  activities alone has no  independent influence
on the migration choice.

The series of equations  documents  the  importance of  demographic

In  all  models,  the
structure to  the  choice  of the  French migration circuit. 
families  with a larger number of  adult men to  cultivate the millet  fields  are
more  likely to send sons to France.  This  confirms  the  importance of  the  labor
constraint on the decision to attempt migration to France.  Households
constrained by  a small  number of  men simply cannot afford to  be without the
men  for  the extended periods  involved in  this  pattern of  migration.

It  had been  expected that the  polygynous  households would be more

19

q

0

likely  to  send men to  France,  but the  results  in Model  5  (Table 10),  show that
the  opposite  is  true:  Househo.lds  with a monogamous  structure  are more  likely
to  send  sons  to France.  While  we know that  men often leave  for France
monogamous  and  become polygamous  over  the  course of  several  visits home, we
had  expected that these  men would be  drawn from polygamous  households,  and
they are  not.  By  controlling for the  number of  men  in the  household, we  are
able to  see  that  the  earlier relation observed between migration to  France  and
polygyny is  due to the number  of  men in  these  complex households  rather than
the number  of  wives.

Where  family and community  patterns reinforce  each other is  in  the

realm of ties  and support for  migration.  These equations consistently show
that  families  that have migrant  kin and who  live  in villages  with high  levels
of  migration  have higher probabilities  of  sending  sons  to  France.  Both
findings  are consistent  with  our hypotheses.  The  findings,  however, are all
the  more  striking  for their resilience  with and without  the various  controls
for  ethnic  identity.  After  controlling  for  family and village ethnic
identity, the  family  and community migration history continues to  exert  a
strong  influence on migration  choices.  Going to  France  is  much  less  likely  in
family or village contexts  little accustomed to migration  of  any  form.  Where
migration  is  new to  the  family or community,  the chances  are  much greater  that
it will  be an  African than a  French migration that  is  adopted.

CONCLUSIONS

Taken  individually, the men who  migrate to  France conform to  the

expectation  that  it  is  the Soninke  who  choose  France over all  other
destinations.  However, when the underlying  demographic and  economic
situations  of  their  families are taken  into  consideration,  it  is  seen  that
their ethnic  identity is  much less  important than  the demographic  composition
of  their household and  the economic  and agrarian  context in  which the  family
finds  themselves.  Regardless of  ethnicity,  the families  with more adult men
are able to send  men to France.  Having kin to assist  in  the migration  process
and extensive information about the  migration process  from  other families  in
the village also  facilitate migration  to France.  Low income  is  a push  to any
migration  from the region, but particularly for men going to France.  The
regression equations predicting the  numbers of  current migrants from a
household  show the same  patterns  of  relation,  indicating the salience of human
resource constraints and  underlying poverty to migration flows  from the
region.

Using multivariate analysis,  a technique of  analysis not  yet  employed in

the analysis of migration  flows  from the  Senegal River Valley, we have been
able to clarify in  part the complex ways that ethnicity  influence  the choice
of migration destinations.  By  adopting a perspective  that the migration
decisions reflect fundamental  family and  village constraints, we have shown
that being Soninke  is  not so  important  to the current choice  of  France as
other analyses of past flows  have  shown.  What  is  more  important  is  living in
a Soninke  village.  As  local observers  have noted, the  other  ethnic groups,

20

especially  the Khassonke,  are picking  up the behavior patterns  of  the  Soninke
and clearly migration to France  is  one  of them.

This analysis  also differes  with  some other  "givens" of  migration analysi

for this region.  Though the bivariate tables showed  that  men coming  from
villages  hard-hit by drought are  more  likely  to go  to  France  as  part of  the
family's  strategy to  diversify their economic base,  in  fact we  find no
evidence  after controlling for other aspects of  the household  and community
structure that  drought  is  a  factor  in  the  choice  of  France or Africa.

In many migration analyses  we  find that migration  rates  are higher  for thE

literate or for those  aspiring  to the  modern or  urban world,  and, at  the
community  level,  for communities with  good educational  facilities  (Findley,
1987).  There  is,  however, no  evidence  of this  relation  in  the  Senegal  River
Valley.  Perhaps  because the  level  of  literacy  is  so  low,  it  is  simply  not
relevant  to most  migration decisions.  There  is  some evidence  that  access to  a
primary school  does  facilitate  migration to  France,  after controlling  for
relevant  interactions,  access to  schools is  no  longer a  significant predictor
of  recent migration to  France.  At  least  in  this  region,  families are  not
educating their children  for migration as part  of  their mobility  strategy.

Another  conventional  assumption about the region  is that  access  to

irrigation  slows migration.  However, both  the bivariate and the multivariate
results  show that  families living  in  villages  served by  irrigation  are  more,
not less,  likely  to  send sons  to France,  as  compared to  African destinations,
a relation that  is  consistent in  the bivariate  and multivariate analyses,  as
well  as with  other research on migration  and irrigation  in the  middle  Senegal
River Valley. 
slowing emigration to  France with the major new  irrigation projects  to  be made
available  as  a result of the  completion of the Manantali  dam.

This finding  casts doubt on  the efficacy  with regard  to

Note, however, that  the  complement of  this relation  is  that  these

irrigation projects  are  likely to  reduce the migration to  the  African
destinations.  Interviews with the  families of the  villages with the
small-scale irrigation projects  in the Kayes portion  of  the region  illustrate
the  dynamics  of  this relation.  Men in these villages  view the  irrigation
possibilities  as  a means to generate cash income by raising  vegetables and
fruits.  They already have  a sufficiently productive subsistence agriculture
that when  they are able  to raise this  money at home  through irrigated  cash
crops,  they no  longer are obliged  to  leave during the dry  season to  seek  work
outside  the  village.  For the families of  the men  already  in the  French
migration circuit, their  incomes  and production  are already so  low  that the
cultivation of cash crops in  the dry season  still  does not suffice to meet
their  needs.

Indeed the likely effects  of  efforts to diversify the economy and to

link it  to the external monetary economy via  increased commercialization,
should only  further increase  the flows  to  France relative to other
destinations.  This  pattern is  consistent with the bivariate relations,  and

21

compatible  with a bivariate  pattern  that washed  out when the  other economic
factors  were  considered, namely of  more migration to  France  among  families
with nonmigration cash  income sources.  All  evidence  points to  the utilization
of  migration  to France  as a strategy  to  foster  insertion of  the  family  and the
community  into the global  economy,  a tendency apparently  little  influenced by
the  local  farm situation or  crop cycles  from year  to year.

While the  direction of  influence  is  not as  we had hypothesized  for these
economic variables, they are consistent with  the view of  a two-tiered  system
of  family migration options.  It  is  a  system which  is  not  stratified by
economic  class  so  much as  it  is  committment to  the  local  economic  structure,
with all  its  dfficulties.  Whereas the  migrants  in  the African  circuits  remain
committed to their  local  economies,  arranging their migrations  to  reinforce
their efforts  to make the  local  economy work  for themselves, the  families  with
men in  the  French circuits appear to use  migration to France  as  a way to break
away  from the  local  constraints  and to  develop linkages  with the  global
economy.  Despite the years  of  migration  to  France undertaken by the men  of
this region,  they have reaped  little  in the way  of  local  economic  development.
The only tangible  result appears  to  be  reinforcement of  the  dependence of  the
families  with French migrants on  the  remittances.

If  French  migration is  viewed as  a base  for developing enterprises  with

external  linkages, the  continued dependence  of a  few families  on  the
increasingly  exclusive French migration  circuit  may  signal  the  emergence of  a
more  inegalitarian class  structure, comprised  of the  affluent who  have
insulated  themselves  from the  vagaries and  stagnation  of the  local  economy by
French migration  and the much poorer who continue  to  be locked  into a
circulation between the home  subsistence  economy and  labor  migration elsewhere
in Africa.  In  a  village of  2000  there may  be  only 30  distinct  family chains,
current social  norms calling  for  wealth sharing among kin  have dampened the
tendencies  toward unequal  accumulation, but  if  the economic  forces continue  to
press hard on these  families,  can the indigenous  redistribution mechanisms
continue  to work?  The record from other world regions  is  not encouraging.

The  combination of  results pertaining  to  the number of  men in  the

household and the  families prior migration experience  imply that  falling
fertility ultimately,  currently a very distant prospect,  may  shift men out of
the  French migration circuit.  One of  the  strongest  and most consistent family
constraints  on migration to France  is  a manpower constraint.  If  family sizes
were  significantly smaller, due either to changes  in  fertility or in  the
propensity to  live  in large extended  units,  families will  not be able  to
juggle  their labor resources  to enable one member to go to France.  At the
same time, prior migration to France  by someone  in  the  family increases  the
chance  of  migration to France,  so if  there  are fewer going due to the
manpower  constraints, there  is  less  chance of  the pattern getting
established.  In conjunction with the continued difficulties of  families  new
to  the French  migration circuit to get  established  in the  French circuit,
these demographic  realities  should have  an  increasing dampening effect on
migration to  France.  Given  the  clearly  ambivalent attitudes  toward French

22

migration expressed by the men  and their  families,  faced with these
constraints, there  is  likely  to  be  even stronger searching  for  a migration or
staying option  that can  substitute  for the  French migration circuit  so  that
the disadvantages  of  long  absences  are minimized.  So  far,  the youth  of  the
region have  not yet  identified this  alternative, but they  continue to  search.

23

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Adams, Adrian. LE LONG  VOYAGE DES  GENS DU FLEUVE. Paris:  Francois Maspero,

1977.

Amselle, Jean-Loup.  (1978) Migration et  societe  neotraditionalle:  Le  cas

des  Bambara du  Jitumu  (Mali).  CAHIERS  D'ETUDES AFRICAINES.  18(Pt.  4)
(72):  487-502.

Ba,  Fama  H.  1987.  "Migrations et  developpement dans la  vallee du  fleuve

Senegal."  POPULATION ET DEVELOPPEMENT EN AFRIQUE. Ed.  by Hedi  Jemai.
Dakar:  CODESRIA.

Bilsborrow,  Richard, Thomas  McDevitt,  Sherrie Kossoudjie,  and  Richard

Fuller.  1987.  "The impact  of  origin community characteristics  on
rural-urban out-migration  in  a developing country."  DEMOGRAPHY.  24(2),
191-210.

Brown,  Lawrence  and Rickie Sanders.  1981.  "Toward a devewlopment  paradigm

of  migration with particular reference to  the Third World."  MIGRATION
DECISION MAKING:  MULTI-DISCIPLINARY APPROACHES TO MICROLEVEL STUDIES
IN DEVELOPED AND DEVELOPING  COUNTRIES.  Gordon  F.  DeJong and  Robert W.
Gardner, eds.  New York:  Pergamon  Press.

Brown, Lawrence  and Andrew Goetz.  1987.  "Development-related contextual

effects  and  individual  attributes  in  Third World migration processes:
A Venezuela  example"  DEMOGRAPHY.  24(4),  497-516.

Caldwell,  John C.,  P.H. Reddy, and Pat  Caldwell.  "Periodic high  risk as  a

cause  of  fertility  decline  in  a changing rural  environment:  Survival
strategies  in  the  1980-1983  South  Indian drought,"  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
AND CULTURAL CHANGE,  34(4),  July  1986,  675-701.  Caldwell,  John  C.,  P.H.

Conde, Julien  & Michele Fleury-Brousse  (1983).  LES  MIGRATIONS

INTERNATIONALES  EN  FRANCE:  LE  CAS  DES MALIENS,  MAURITANIENS  ET
SENEGALAIS.  WDOC.0140D/pl-43  15.709,  Centre  de Developpement, OECD,
Paris.

Conde, Julien & Papa Syr  Diagne  (1986).  SOUTH-NORTH INTERNATIONAL

MIGRATIONS:  A CASE STUDY OF  MALIAN, MAURITANIAN AND  SENEGALESE
MIGRANTS  FROM SENEGAL RIVER VALLEY TO FRANCE.  In collaboration with
N.G. Ouaidou, K. Boye  & A. Kader.  Development Centre  Papers. Paris:
OECD.

Coulibaly,  Sidiki, Joel  Gregory, and Victor Piche.  LES MIGRATIONS

VOLTAIQUES:  IMPORTANCE ET AMBIVALENCE DE  LA MIGRATION VOLTAIQUE.  (TOME
I).  Centre Voltaique de  la  Recherche Scientifique  and  Institut
National  de  la  Demographie.  Printed by  IDRC, Ottawa, Canada,  1980.

Delaunay, Daniel.  (1984).  DE LA CAPTIVITE A  L'EXIL:  HISTOIRE  ET  DEMOGRAPHIE

DES MIGRATIONS PAYSANNES DANS  LA  MOYENNE VALLEE DU  FLEUVE SENEGAL.
Travaux et Documents  de  1'ORSTOM. No.  174,  Paris:  ORSTOM.

Diemer,  Geert and Ellen Ch. W.  van der  Laan.  (1987).  L'IRRIGATION AU SAHEL:

LA CRISE DES PERIMETRES IRRIGUES  ET  LA VOI  HAALPULAAR. Paris:
Karthala.

Fieloux, Michele.  1980.  LES SENTIERS  DE  LA NUIT:  LES MIGRATIONS RURALES

LOBI  DE  LA HAUTE-VOLTA VERS  LA COTE  D'IVOIRE. Travaux et  Documents  de
l'ORSTOM  No.  110,  Paris:  ORSTOM.

Findley,  Sally  E. 

RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MIGRATION:  ALTERNATIVE FAMILY

CHOICES  IN THE  PHILIPPINES.  Boulder:  Westview  Press,  1987.

Gardner, Robert W.  1981.  "Macrolevel influences  on the  migration decision

process."  MIGRATION  DECISION MAKING:  MULTI-DISCIPLINARY APPROACHES T
MICROLEVEL STUDIES  IN  DEVELOPED AND DEVELOPING  COUNTRIES.  Gordon  F.
DeJong and Robert W.  Gardner, eds.  New York:  Pergamon Press.

V

Graves,  Theodore  and Nancy  B.  Graves. 1980.  "Kinship ties and  the  preferre

adaptive  strategies  of  urban  migrants."  THE VERSATILITY  OF KINSHIP.
Linda S. Cordel  and  Stephen J. Beckerman, eds.  New York:  Academic
Press.

Merton,  Robert K.  and  Alice Kitt Rossi.  1968.  "Contributions to the theor:

of  reference group behavior."  READINGS  IN REFERENCE GROUP THEORY.
Herbert  Hyman and  Eleanor Singer, eds.  New York:  Free Press,  28-68.

Ministere du Plan.  1985.  DIAGNOSTIC DE  LA REGION  DE  KAYES. Comite Regional

de developpement, Kayes:  Republique du Mali,  Min.  du Plan.

Minvielle,  Jean-Paul  (1985).  PAYSANS MIGRANTS DU  FOUTA TORO:  LA VALLEE  DU

Travaux et  Documents  No. 191,  Editions  de l'ORSTOM, Paris:

SENEGAL. 
ORSTOM.

OMVS  (Organisation pour  la mise  en valeur du fleuve  Senegal).  1980.  ETUDE

SOCIO-ECONOMIQUE DU BASSIN DU  FLEUVE  SENEGAL. Dakar/Saint Louis:OMVS.

Pollet, Eric  & Grace Winter  (1971).  LA SOCIETE SONINKE  (DYAHUNU, MALI).

Institut de  Sociologie, Etudes Ethnologiques.  Bruxelles:  Editions  de
l'Institut de  Sociologie, Universite Libre de  Bruxelles.

Portes, Alejandro and John  Walton. 1981.  LABOR, CLASS, AND THE

INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM.  New York:Academic Press.

Roberts, Kenneth.  1982.  "Agrarian structure and  labor mobility in  rural

Mexico."  POPULATION AND DEVELOPMENT REVIEW.  8(2)  June:  299-322.

Stark,  Oded. The  asset demand for children during  agricultural

modernization.  POPULATION AND DEVELOPMENT REVIEW.  (1981).  7(4):
671-5.4

Tilly, Charles  and C. Harold Brown.  1967.  "On uprooting, kinship, and  the

auspices  of  migration."  INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF COMPARATIVE
SOCIOLOGY.  8(2):  139-164.

Urzua,  Raul.  1981.  "Population redistribution mechanisms  as  related  to
various  forms of  development."  POPULATION DISTRIBUTION  POLICIES  IN
DEVELOPMENT PLANNING. Population  Studies No.  75,  Department of
INternational  Economic and  Social Affairs, United  Nations:  New York,
53-69.

Weigel, J.-Y.  (1982).  MIGRATION ET PRODUCTION DOMESTIQUE DES  SONINKE  DU

SENEGAL. Travaux et  Documents de  l'ORSTOM No. 146.  Paris:  ORSTOM.

Weist,  Raymond E.  1973.  "Wage-labor migration and  the household  in  a

Mexican town."  JOURNAL OF ANTHROPOLOGICAL RESEARCH.  29(3),  AUTUMN:
180-209.

Wood, Charles H. 1981.  "Structural changes and household strategies:  A

conceptual  framework for  the study of rural  migration."  HUMAN
ORGANIZATION. 

40(4),  Winter:  338-344.

