Fundamentalisms, Globalisation and Women's Human Rights in Senegal 
Author(s): Fatou Sow 
Source: Gender and Development, May, 2003, Vol. 11, No. 1, Women Reinventing 
Globalisation (May, 2003), pp. 69-76
Published by: Taylor & Francis, Ltd. on behalf of Oxfam GB 

 

Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/4030697

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide 
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and 
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. 
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at 
https://about.jstor.org/terms

Taylor & Francis, Ltd. and   are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access 
to Gender and Development

This content downloaded from 

            128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 21:47:26 UTC             

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 69

 Fundamenta isms,
 globalisation and women's
 human rights in Senegal

 Fatou Sow

 One response to the phenomenon of globalisation in politics, economics and culture has been a
 resurgence offundamentalist movements. Tofundamentalists, women symbolise ethnic and cultural
 purity, and their rights and status have become an enormous issue. But the links between
 fundamentalisms, tradition and modernity are very complex. In this article I look at the example of
 Senegal, where traditional spiritual beliefs are mingled with the newer world religions, in very
 complex ways. Consequently, it is difficult to understand the connections between fundamentalism,
 globalisation and women's human rights. But this understanding is critical if women are to obtain
 and retain equal rights with men. This article is taken from a presentation given at a workshop
 entitled 'Fundamentalisms, globalisation and women's human rights', at the AWID Forum.

 T he issues of human rights, democracy
 and citizens' participation have never
 been debated as much as they are
 today - both internationally, and in Africa.
 The world is now dominated by the ideas
 and rules of the free market, which are
 forcing political changes, obliging states to
 open up to the world market. These changes
 are altering the relationship between states
 and citizen. The state is reshaping itself, in
 line with the prescriptions of the inter-
 national financial institutions (IFIs) and the
 World Trade Organisation (WTO) that
 there should be a lesser state presence or
 even a total absence of the state, in contexts
 where the role of the state was previously
 very prominent. States currently seem
 more concerned about their sheer survival
 in the world market than in satisfying the
 interests of their citizens.

 The talk of human rights heard in
 international fora masks the violation of
 citizen's rights in general - and women's
 rights in particular - which accompanies
 globalisation. In particular, it is increasingly

 difficult to address women's rights when
 policies reduce social budgets, and privatise
 resources and basic services to the poorest
 populations. How can we sustain the few
 gains made for equality between women
 and men, when states are unable to
 guarantee that these are reflected in women's
 lives? Women experience globalisation
 daily when they go in search of water at the
 hydrants in poor neighborhoods, or when
 they busy themselves in thousands of other
 ways to fulfill the needs of their families.
 These are needs that men are no longer able
 to meet, or needs arising from the cutting of
 state provision for education or health
 services, under the constraints of structural
 adjustment policies. It is primarily women
 who pay the actual costs of the privati-
 sation of the economy.

 All these factors have favoured the
 emergence of fundamentalist movements,
 in environments where religion is an
 integral part of culture. This article focuses
 on the example of Senegal. The resurgence
 of Muslim discourse, and its impact on

 Gender and Development Vol. 11, No. 1, May 2003

This content downloaded from 

            128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 21:47:26 UTC             

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 70 Gender and Development

 women, is what interests us most here,
 because of its impact on national life.

 Religion and culture in
 Senegal

 Senegal is a country located on the west
 coast of Africa, which had a long spiritual
 tradition even before Judeo-Christianity
 and Islam set roots. Pre-Islamic and pre-
 Christian religious underpinnings are
 deeply embedded in daily social attitudes
 and practices. These form the basis for
 numerous informal social norms, and
 formal laws. For example, it is customary in
 many Senegalese communities to sacrifice
 an animal when a newborn child is given
 a name, or during funerals. There are other
 similar examples. People still spill animal
 blood before undertaking an important
 event, to call upon the spirits (rab) and
 enlist their support, or in order to mollify
 their wrath. People bury cola nuts and
 charms, or pour sour milk or animal blood
 on the foundations when starting to build a
 house. Others drink and smear their bodies
 with all kinds of mixtures for luck, before
 taking an exam, applying for a job, or to
 ensure that their professional or political
 job remains secure.

 Islamic and Christian practices have
 flourished and mingled with traditional
 practices. In the first example given above,
 a Muslim rite may be used for the animal
 sacrifice, with people facing Mecca, and
 reciting Koranic prayers. Good luck charms
 are made from soaked paper inscribed with
 Koranic chapters. A Sereer Christian from
 Sine would use the Bible for this purpose.
 All these types of behaviour are looked
 upon as familiar and sensible. Whether
 they are popular or not, they are never
 considered fetishist or pagan. It does not
 matter to the people who practise this
 behaviour what traditional healers or
 priests think of it. To the majority of
 believers, whether they are Muslims,
 Christians, or follow indigenous beliefs,

 these practices represent a call to the spirit
 world, to enlist the ancestors' protection.
 Senegalese of all religious denominations,
 and of all ranks and social standing,
 depend on religious laws and rites to define
 their collective identity.

 Many of these rites lie within women's
 realm. They participate in them either as
 actors or leaders of worship. Female
 divinities govern the areas bordering the
 sea and rivers, between Dakar, Cape Verde
 and Saint-Louis on the north coast of the
 country. Fishermen's wives make offerings
 to Mame Jaare and Mame Coumba Bang as
 boats prepare to leave the shore at the
 beginning of the fishing season. This is an
 important activity in a country with over
 600 kilometres of coastline. Women healers
 (facckat) preside over fertility rites (to cure
 infertility, or protect a pregnancy), and
 possession rites (including ceremonies of
 exorcism), and administer drug-yielding
 plants for therapeutic purposes, in cases of
 physical or mental illness or emotional
 crisis brought on by different types of
 problems, including difficult marital
 relationships.

 In the newer world religions there is
 much less of a leading role for women. In
 Islam in particular, leadership of religious
 rites is mostly taken by men. This has had
 an impact on the traditional rites. By
 adding a few verses from the Koran to their
 incantations, male healers have taken over
 from female healers, giving the rites a new
 'holy' dimension. Women have given up
 their roles as high-priestesses. The masters
 of worship and healers (who were referred
 to as 'shamans' in colonial ethnological
 terminology), have attained an even
 higher status than they had before the
 coming of the new religious beliefs. Thus,
 we are now witnessing subtle changes to
 cultural practices, in line with the gradual
 Islamisation of the country. A spiritual
 patriarchy is now established. The important
 titles of Serigne, Thierno or Marabat are
 given to men, but never to women, no
 matter what the degree of their acquired

This content downloaded from 

            128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 21:47:26 UTC             

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Fundamentalisms, globalisation and women's human rights in Senegal 71

 wisdom. The male title Serigne (nowadays
 used for 'Mr') designates a religious man;
 the female title, Sokhna (now used for 'Mrs'
 either designates the female relative of a
 Muslim holy man, or a woman who has
 religious knowledge and learning.

 Senegal, the land of Islam

 Senegal has slowly become Islamised since
 the ninth century.1 Today, almost 90 per
 cent of its population (close to 10,000) are
 members of four religious brotherhoods.
 Each is led by a marabout or spiritual
 leader. These are the Tijaania, of Algerian
 origin, the Xaadria of Mauritanian origin
 (Boutlimit), the Mourides (Touba) and the
 Layeen. These last two brotherhoods are of
 local origin and can be seen as nationalist
 responses to colonialism, when people
 strengthened their sense of collective
 identity in the face of Westernisation and
 Judeo-Christian beliefs imported through
 formal education and changes in social and
 political models. While France, the colonial
 power, spent a century crushing monarchies
 from Senegambian soil, the traditional
 authorities gathered strength and dynamism
 around Islam.

 Even though Senegal is a Muslim
 country, its culture is not an Arab culture.
 There are certainly Arabic terms in local
 languages, especially from the Koranic
 legal code, but Arabic is only spoken in the
 country sparingly, in order to read and
 recite the Koran. The Arabic alphabet was
 used to transcribe national languages,2 even
 before Latin characters were adopted.
 Many rules of civil and social conduct such
 as the proper way to say 'hello', 'thank
 you', or conduct marital and social customs,
 testify to a deep Islamic imprint. This
 imprint has mingled with other influences,
 in harmony with some and in opposition or
 contradiction with others. For example, it
 needs to be emphasised that women
 wearing a veil, or female seclusion within
 domestic space, are not practices from
 Wolof, Sereer, Pel, Mandeng or Koniagi

 traditions, which make up the cultural base
 of Senegal. And matriarchal lineage still
 defines the fundamental foundations of
 Senegalese kinship systems, in the face of a
 patriarchal Islam.

 In pre-colonial Senegal, a strong religious
 sensibility was governed by tolerance. Into
 this context, French colonialism imposed
 the separation of religion and state. The
 Napoleonic code was imposed in governing
 family relationships. This was a partial
 success, with Christian families undergoing
 a civil ceremony before a church wedding.
 All civil marriages forced the spouses to
 abide by rules of French law, especially
 mandatory monogamy, legal divorce, and
 so on. But the Muslim communities - even
 including individuals within them who had
 been most influenced by the French -
 categorically opposed the use of the civil
 code. Koranic law, adapted in line with
 local traditions, continued to be admin-
 istered. Muslim jurisdictions managed by a
 Cadi (Islamic judge) were reinforced as
 well. Their legal decisions covered various
 areas of expertise, especially family law
 (divorce, child custody, family conflicts or
 inheritance, for example). They were, until
 independence, recognised by the colonial
 state. The colonial state was unable to ban
 polygamy, or to make civil marriages
 mandatory. The legislation which it tried to
 introduce was not respected in cities or
 villages. People continued to abide by laws
 enacted by traditional custom, and then by
 religious law (if not at the same time).

 Senegalese Islam, while giving shape to
 moral and social life, has been relatively
 gentle towards women. It recognises the
 importance of each family system, whether
 this is patrilineal or matrilineal. Beneath the
 general principle that women should be
 obedient to men, women have a degree of
 choice in negotiating their status and their
 authority within the family and society.

This content downloaded from 

            128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 21:47:26 UTC             

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 72 Gender and Development

 Secularisation, women's
 rights and religious laws:
 managing identities

 In Senegal, secular forces have promoted a
 state based on ideas of 'modernity'. The
 eight constitutions that Senegal has drafted
 since its independence in 1960 have all
 been based on the principle of the secular
 state. This includes the current Constitution,
 voted upon in 2001. In its efforts at social
 'modernisation', the new state, presided
 over by Leopold Sedar Senghor, who is a
 member of the Sereer ethnic group and
 Christian, underwent significant legal
 reforms. Enacted into law in 1973, the
 Family Law Act of Senegal was an impor-
 tant and original reform in the West
 African region.3 The Family Law Act,
 which aimed to be secular and applicable to
 all Senegalese, no matter what their
 religious denomination, met strong
 opposition from the outset. All Muslim
 tribunals were abolished. Muslim authorities
 proclaimed their commitment to the
 principles of the Shari'a (fiqh) and a large
 majority of men believed the code to favour
 women too much. Indeed, the code provided
 impetus for women's rights insofar as it
 represented a series of rules set by the
 legislator and not by the interpretation of
 customs, or even by customs that were re-
 invented to suit various needs and contexts.

 However, the code still contained an
 important number of Koranic dispositions,
 and it was left to citizens to decide whether
 to adopt these or not. For example, in the
 case of inheritance law, there are two
 options: either the inheritance is equally
 divided among children regardless of sex,
 or an unequal share is awarded to the two
 sexes (the daughter inherits half of the
 son's share, and only children born into
 wedlock have to right to inherit).

 Similarly, in the case of marriage,
 dowry is possible, but not mandatory. But
 despite all the sex discrimination which
 appears in the Family Code, the Senegalese

 state was attempting to secularise the
 institution of marriage. Consent, celebration,
 and registry of marriage at City Hall were
 demanded of the spouses. Most importantly,
 divorce had to be decreed in a civil court of
 law. Spousal support was set by the judge.
 While the code does not eliminate poly-
 gamy, it requires men to choose between
 monogamy, polygamy with two, or poly-
 gamy with more than two. Once a man has
 chosen monogamy, this cannot be reversed.
 While Christians could marry through a
 civil ceremony, without going through the
 church, Muslim couples must celebrate
 their union at the mosque as dictated by
 their Muslim identity. A civil marriage is
 mainly an administrative formality.

 Despite the fact that Senegal is a
 country in which culture, religion and
 secularism intermingle and contradict one
 another, its citizens reaffirmed their
 commitment to the principles of secularism
 in the constitution voted in 2001, and
 confirmed equality between men and
 women in so doing.

 Yet, secularism seems to infringe upon
 people's deepest sense of identity. Modern-
 isation, which is rapidly changing the
 landscape in Senegal, does not allow for
 disagreement with the socio-economic,
 political and material changes associated
 with it. The time for questioning the extent
 to which Africans remain African if they
 adopt aspects of Western culture seems to
 have gone.4 Topical concerns now seem to
 consist in youngsters starting to challenge
 the authority of elders, especially where
 new ideas about female identity are
 challenging ideas about male identity
 (which have also changed).

 The status of women is an issue which
 is at the heart of people's ideas about
 society and culture, and it is hence at the
 heart of the confrontations between Islam
 and modernity, between ideas about a
 Muslim 'Africanness' and Westernisation.
 Fundamentalist forces criticise the concept
 of modernity, which they say is imposed

This content downloaded from 

            128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 21:47:26 UTC             

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Fundamentalisms, globalisation and women's human rights in Senegal 73

 'from the outside'. For them, the important
 thing is to reconquer and reclaim a traditional
 identity. In the eyes of fundamentalists,
 nothing should be changed (even though
 change is an inevitable process) and a
 woman is a symbol of ethnic 'purity'.
 Challenges to these religious and patriarchal
 power structures are presented through
 Senegalese women's new access to education
 (a symbol of modernisation), and the
 intellectual and professional freedom they
 can potentially gain. It should be noted,
 however, that while religion - which
 freezes ideas of women and their status in
 time - does not bring women freedom,
 modernisation and Westernisation do not
 necessarily guarantee that freedom either.

 The globalisation of
 women's human rights

 The globalisation of the issue of human
 rights should open infinite possibilities to
 promote the rights of women. We cannot
 talk about African women's rights without
 taking into account the globalisation of this
 issue. Women's claims to equality have
 been strengthened by the international
 recognition of universal human rights, and
 by scrutiny of the extent to which these
 rights are upheld in particular contexts.
 Two decades of world conferences on
 women, from 1975 to 1995, have allowed
 debates about women's struggles for their
 rights to be heard at national and inter-
 national levels. Women's claims have been
 legitimised by various conventions signed
 by states.

 For example, international campaigns to
 outlaw the different forms of female genital
 mutilation (FGM) have pushed some
 African states to legislate to abolish these
 practices. In Senegal, this occurred in 1999.
 Forms of FGM were found in the regions of
 Hal Pulaar and Soninke, in the north and
 north-east, and in the south, in Mandeng
 and Pulaar. While FGM is actually a pre-
 Islamic practice, it has been embraced in

 Muslim communities as a guarantee and
 symbol of female purity - a concept which
 is so important in Islam. It is sometimes
 proclaimed that women who are not
 genitally mutilated cannot say prayers or
 serve meals. This is a context in which
 ideas of cleanliness are closely linked to
 ideas of religious purity: where to perform
 one's ablutions before prayers, and to
 abstain from praying and from fasting
 during menstruation, are religious obli-
 gations. This affects gender relations:
 sexual activity during menstruation is
 prohibited for reasons of impurity. At the
 end of a menstrual period, women must
 undergo a ritual cleansing before being
 allowed to pray again. Islam is invoked by
 those who wish to continue with the
 practice of FGM and to legitimise its
 continuation.

 A similar analysis can be produced
 regarding violence against women. Since
 the reform of the penal code in 1999, this
 type of violence is punished more severely
 than before. In the old French and
 Senegalese penal codes, domestic violence
 to women was permitted if there were
 extenuating circumstances. In Shari'a law,
 beating one's wife is allowed in specific
 circumstances. Male public opinion was
 strongly opposed to the first public
 campaigns against domestic violence led by
 women's organisations, which were
 sparked off by the death of Dokki Niasse.
 Dokki Niasse was a young woman who, in
 1993, was beaten by her husband while
 she was in the early stages of pregnancy.
 Taken to hospital, she died a few hours
 later. Her husband was arrested by the
 police, and jailed only after women from
 her neighbourhood marched, and petitions
 were signed nationwide. The case against
 him was dismissed three years later
 because the doctor was unable to establish
 that her death was a result of the beating.

 Finally, international debates about the
 need to ensure women's equal access to
 politics and decision-making has contri-
 buted to a larger contingent of women

This content downloaded from 

            128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 21:47:26 UTC             

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 74 Gender and Development

 entering the public sphere of political and
 economic power, sometimes through
 positive discrimination.

 Fundamentalism as a
 response to globalisation

 During important international gatherings
 in the recent past, the church and the
 mosque have forged an alliance in order to
 limit women's rights. It is widely acknow-
 ledged that the Christian discourse of Pope
 Jean Paul II plays a role in constraining
 women's freedoms, especially in terms of
 their sexuality and reproductive rights. The
 condemnation by the Vatican of contra-
 ception, including condoms, and abortion,
 weighs heavily on the sexual and repro-
 ductive rights of Christians. Muslim
 women are relatively free: they may use
 contraception, and therapeutic abortion, if
 life is threatened. However, Muslim women
 cannot refuse to see pregnancy to term for
 any personal reasons, or undergo an
 abortion if they have been raped. Hundreds
 of women have died from secret pregnancies
 and abortions as a result of the imposition
 of these religious dictates.

 During the 1970s, the Koranic discourse
 was brought together with the power of
 money. Islamic power emerged as a major
 force with the Iranian revolution, and with
 the wave of activism generated from the
 escalating price of oil from countries in
 the Maghreb and the Middle-East. The
 influence of this new religious movement
 has been significant in the sub-Saharan
 Muslim world, and gave a boost to already
 existing movements within the region. As
 Islamic power became evident in the
 Senegalese political landscape, Senghor,
 the Christian President of Senegal for over
 30 years, made efforts to strengthen
 secularism, and maintained a certain
 balance between communities of different
 religious denominations.

 In 1981, his successor was immediately
 seen by a part of public opinion as a

 Muslim President. Certainly, he allied
 himself spiritually to the very powerful
 brotherhood of Mou rides, mentioned
 earlier, which controls the production of
 peanuts,5 other tradeable products, and
 craft industries. Migrations of people from
 the Mourides brotherhood to other parts of
 Africa, and to North America, have
 resulted in significant sums of money being
 sent back for re-investment in the country.
 During his 20-year presidency, between
 1981 and 2000, manipulation and mutual
 influence became established between the
 Senegalese state (initially ruled by a single
 party system, then a multi-party system),
 and the religious leaders, for the control of
 the mainly rural electorate. The Mourides
 spiritual leader would encourage the
 believers to vote for a particular candidate.

 The March 2000 elections overthrew the

 socialist party in power for the previous 40
 years. The new President proclaimed
 himself a Muslim, a talibe6 of Mourides, to
 the surprise of the political establishment.
 A lawyer and professor of economics - an
 exemplification of modernity - he has
 encouraged the progression of a funda-
 mentalist discourse. This has caused
 concern to civil society and women's
 organisations. It is true that Senegal is
 certainly not a religious state such as Iran
 or Algeria. There is no 'Islamist' power as
 such; indeed, the constitution prohibits the
 creation of political parties based on
 religious, ethnic or gender affiliation.
 Nonetheless, during the presidential
 elections of March 2000, three parties
 claiming Islamic denomination offered
 their candidatures. They were effectively
 ignored by the electorate, but their speeches
 about a return to faith and to Shari'a law,
 and their promise to abolish the Family
 Law Act in the event of an electoral victory,
 presented a threat to women.

 Dahira, and other fundamentalist
 religious groups have now emerged, and
 attempt to impose a totally retrograde and
 alienating rhetoric on women, which is

This content downloaded from 

            128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 21:47:26 UTC             

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Fundamentalisms, globalisation and women's human rights in Senegal 75

 disseminated by local radio. Their stip-
 ulations include the wearing of the veil by
 girls in schools, in city streets and in
 villages; a taboo against touching women's
 hands; revival of religious vigils; a return to
 the Islamic practice of patriarchal control
 over women, women's seclusion in domestic
 spaces, and rule of a male household head;
 and condemnation of social changes which
 are rooted in secular law. The airwaves are
 taken over by Islamic preaching until very
 late into the night. Women and children's
 rights are heavily contested, and are
 subject to fights between 'modernists' and
 'Islamists'. Others even question the legi-
 timacy of laws voted on in Parliament.
 Obedience to the patriarchal order is
 looked upon as a sign of commitment to
 God and religious faith. The funda-
 mentalist discourse on culture has gone as
 far as to deny the civilised cultural values
 which Senegalese communities had
 preserved in the face of both Islamisation
 and Christianisation. Wolof Islamic customs
 are questioned in the name of a united,
 outward-looking Islam.

 At the time of writing, the state is
 getting ready to implement changes to the
 Family Law Act. Resistance to this is
 strong. One of the changes proposes a
 modernisation of the concept of paternal
 authority, so that parental authority over
 the children is shared by the mother and
 the father. This change is in line with the
 principle of equal rights as stipulated in the
 constitution. The parliamentary debate on
 this has so far been unable to resolve the
 issue. To debate women's issues is also to
 debate the question of male identity.

 Conclusion

 Religious forces in Senegal are demanding
 greater power in the public sphere and in
 decision-making institutions which shape
 the lives of citizens. The intention of certain
 religious groups is to influence the political
 process through their interpretation of

 divine texts. Fundamentalist groups
 manipulate religion for ideological and
 political means, and women's rights issues
 are a particular focus. We cannot allow
 them to succeed, or leave it to society to
 introduce the necessary changes to abolish
 discrimination on the basis of gender, class
 or race. We need laws to reduce violence, to
 prohibit marriage and family practices
 which harm women, such as polygamy and
 divorce by repudiation, and to give states
 the power to renegotiate power relations
 between the sexes in the pursuit of greater
 social justice. Here lies the real challenge of
 democracy.

 Fatou Sow is Professor of Sociology, and a
 member of the Groupe de Recherche sur les
 Femmes et les Lois au Sene'gal (GREFELS),
 affiliated with the solidarity network Women
 Living Under Muslim Laws. Address:
 Universite' Cheikh Anta Diopb, P206 Dakar,
 Senegal.
 fatousow@sentoo.sn

 Notes

 1 Christian communities live mainly on

 the coast and the south of the country.

 2 Wolofal refers to the transcription of

 Wolof using the Arabic alphabet.

 3 Cote d'Ivoire, Mali and Guinea form-
 ulated their Family Codes much later.
 Benin ratified its code as late as 2002,
 while Niger and Chad, which have
 strong Muslim communities, refuse to
 adhere to secular law on the family for
 religious reasons and questions of
 identity. Except for Mauritania (which
 by establishing itself as an Islamic
 republic in the 1980s has followed
 Shari'a law) all these countries have
 written secularism in golden letters in
 their constitution.

 4 This is a reference to Cheikh Hamidou's
 L'aventure ambigue, a Senegalese novel
 published in the 1960s to highly
 enthusiastic reviews. The author questions

This content downloaded from 

            128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 21:47:26 UTC             

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 76 Gender and Development

 the construction of the African identity
 in light of Western culture.

 5 Peanuts are Senegal's main export crop.
 6 A Talibe is a pupil of the Koranic school,
 given up by his family, who must beg to
 make a living for himself and his teacher.

This content downloaded from 

            128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 21:47:26 UTC             

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

