Concrete examples given are the Wassadou and Patiana valley projects.
In addition, with project management and administrative functions, it houses technical senior management, central M&E and knowledge management functions, the capital access technical specialists who need to interact with the leadership of financial institutions on a regular basis, and the policy support component.
Discussions are underway with BRM and BNDE for the extension of third-party detention operations to other rice mills in the SRV.
Participation of Feed the Future Senegal Naatal Mbay and participating firms and networks at annual events FIDAK (December) and FIARA (March).
Extension of the IT system for the tracking of in-kind loan reimbursements by CNCAS.
Meetings were organized between networks and IFs in the central zone: 1 in Kaffrine with 5 representatives of the 2 networks and 1 in Kaolack with 7 representatives of the 4 networks.
Mainstreaming and expansion of warehouse collateral financing mechanisms: The introduction of third party holding in the offer of services enabled the Bank to track the reimbursements of producers (production credit) and even the removal of the eight (8) industrial rice millers who received a marketing credit.
Under Component 2, Naatal Mbay works with the private sector to improve market access and linkages to small holders, expand both debt and equity investments in key value chains, improve market-driven business development and promote expanded use of financial tools.
Using the insights gained from the season debriefings organized by Naatal Mbay, the enterprise that became GIE Yoonu Toll has set up a specific financing system to guarantee quality white rice, mechanized service providers and seed/input dealers to ensure widespread village level access to value enhancing technologies, financial services, and markets;-Fostering contractual and collaborative intra-value chain linkages and Public Private Partnerships (PPP) to develop sustainable delivery mechanisms for critical technologies, financial services and information;-Building the financial sector’s capacity to support growth and investment in small holder based value chains through adapted working capital credit, equipment leasing, risk management and agriculture insurance mechanisms;-Supporting local private sector led advocacy and contribution to the wider national debate on key competitiveness and food security issues.
The core objective of Naatal Mbay is the scaling and expansion of USAID/PCE’s successful technologies, skills and approaches to ensure the widest possible coverage of smallholder farm households active in the Feed the Future Senegal zone of influence.
In addition, the computerized follow-up extended to 15 consolidation points for a value of 1,170,925,591 FCFA representing almost 38% of the CNCAS's overall seasonal credit portfolio was very conclusive and the results were confirmed with manual monitoring by KAMEX.
Among other things, the following points can be noted: Establishment of the first operation to hedge the seasonal credit portfolio by indexed agricultural insurance in the ACEP branches of Kaolack and Kaffrine; The entry of OIKO Crédit into the capital of PlaNet Guarantee, thus opening up prospects for the development of insurance through refinancing; Extension of the coverage area of the rain gauge network with the acquisition and installation of 24 new automatic rain gauges; Continued growth in production credits and the exponential growth in marketing credits made possible by third-party detention mechanisms; Growing interest of banks in agricultural leasing due to the results obtained by Locafrique; Appropriation by South Forest Zone actors of the MFI as a tool for steering and structuring the value chain; Development of the strategic plan of CNCAS around the axes of collaboration defined in the MOU with Naatal Mbay.
The Consultant working on ICT solutions for agriculture using Naatal Mbay as case study released a first draft for review.
Support to the installation of Riz du Sud marketing points in urban centers of Casamance.
Study of the technological avenues and opportunities for the promotion of the use of ICT solutions by farmers, rural enterprises, decentralized Government extension and support agents, farmers and rural households.
Section 2 is dedicated to the technical program and presents detailed tables that track progress under Naatal Mbay’s three components and their associated sub-elements: Agricultural Productivity Improved, Agricultural Markets Improved, and Agricultural Policy Environment Strengthened.
At the request of the Ministry of Commerce, the monitoring platform will be extended to 64 rice mills in the SRV.
Mainstreaming and expansion of integrated credit mechanisms: Efforts to consolidate and extend the integrated financing model in the Southern Forest Zone continued with a series of technical meetings, culminating in the drafting of memorandums of understanding and the establishment of the architecture of the models to be operationalized.
This workshop was focused on fraud awareness, Branding, Global Food Security Act and budget discussions, effectiveness of implementation, communications with USAID, M&E, GOS and local partnerships.
Takku Liguey has built with its own funds a machine shelter and a storage warehouse for maize procreceived a decorticator through a cost-share arrangement with PADER.
Training of candidate organizations on the USAID contracting framework.
During this quarter, coverage was extended to its portfolio of seasonal credit in the Kaolack and Kaffrine branches.
A prospectus containing the essential storage standards proposed by ITA is being disseminated in the framework of the network training programs.
The highest figures of rice consumption are recorded in the producing zones of Ziguinchor/Sedhiou, the rural non-producing areas of the central peanut basin (Kaolack-Kaffrine) and in Touba while the urban cities of Dakar and Saint-Louis are in the lower end of the spectrum.
It is in this context that the Economic Growth Project came in and provided equipment to test the quality of the paddy and the partnership continued with Feed the Future Senegal Naatal Mbay.
Study of the national, urban and rural, cereal consumption patterns for each production region, regional capitals and the greater Dakar area.
The partner, according to Mr. Yague, took away some of the processing equipment and the computer containing all the data of the company.
President of the Women's Union of Ross Bethio, President of the Network of Women Agriculturists of the North (REFAN), Director of DBF Agro-Industries and Head of Women of Assolucer, Producers of rainfed rice were the guests of this program produced during the FIARA 2017.
Participation of Feed the Future Senegal Naatal Mbay and its partners in regional fairs for the promotion of local cereals.
Founder and CEO of Coumba Nor Thiam SA, now operates a pool of 13 combine harvesters as well as tractors and graders servicing an area of 3,300 hectares and more than 2,000 small-scale farmers in the Senegal River Valley, with whom he contracts every year for a volume of 18,000 MT valued at$ 4.5 million.
15 producer networks in Podor have been sensitized on gender mainstreaming in network activities.
To discuss the "Women's Contribution and Challenges in the Rice Self-Sufficiency Program", the project also hosted a broadcast debate on Sud FM Sen Radio's "Waar-Wi" program.
The feasibility study for the opening of an agricultural leasing desk at CNCAS started with a technical session on leveling expectations and revising the terms of reference.
Deliverable 3 have also already been submitted by IPAR and 7a.
BDS services for craftsmen and SMEs to improve small-scale equipment.
The workshop lead by the DRDR registered the participation of URIS and all seed operators in the Matam area.
5 industrial rice millers in the Senegal River Valley use the latest version of the CommAgri application.
Expanded access to agriculture equipment and mechanized services: The portfolio of Locafrique reached this quarter close to$ 3.7 million (2,132,108,109 FCFA) in investment credits to agricultural value chains actors.
We also expect that the perspectives opened by the recent ACEP adoption of index insurance to secure their farmer credit portfolio in the Saloum will materialize into other banks doing the same and boosting credit to the rain fed cereal sector.
5 women's groups (GIE Kar Yalla Gueye, FPA, GIE Takku Liguey, GIE al Thiaka, UFP) were trained in leadership, public speaking and administrative management.
Organize exchange visits between fferent zones to share experiences and develop inter-regional relationships.
A regional workshop on seed production planning in the Matam region was held on 24 May 2017.
Climate information access and expansion of access to crop insurance: CNAAS installed 24 new rain gauges equipped with automatic transmitters, bringing the total to 87 in the SFZ.
For each of them, information is available on the FPA values and the number of direct beneficiaries.
Rice: Two integrated financing models for paddy rice in Sédhiou and Ziguinchor are being developed.
This effort continued under the PTS and involved collaboration with PADAER, PRODAM and the PPDC of the World Bank which allocate substantial resources to support rain fed rice seed dissemination in Casamance.
This Activity will take place if the results of study with SEDAB and KASEC shows the existence of unreachable areas where certified seeds are needed Seed financing system integrating small seed enterprises, finance institutions and the national research system strengthened.
However, greater control of production costs through bulk purchases slightly improved the gross margin from US$ 198/ha in the previous year to US$ 200/ha.
Support by ASPRODEB and local seed networks for the update and implementation monitoring and update of the Seed Triennial Plans for Maize and Rain fed rice.
Key deliverables and project reports are uploaded to the USAID Development Exchange Clearinghouse (DEC) and other data retrieval mechanisms.
Intensification of Millet best practice demonstrations and Conservation Farming trainings in the SFZ regions for RS 2017.
Training of database managers in the utilization of basic Excel function and pivot tables, Mapsource and Quantum GIS.
The Dakar national headquarters interacts on an ongoing basis with the USAID mission.
Profiling of Consolidation Network implementing capacity, strength and weaknesses, and recommendation of actions and funding approaches to attain sustainability of critical services to memberships beyond Naatal Mbay.
The development of terms of reference for recruiting a consultant to establish packaging norms and quality standards for white rice is underway in collaboration with the National Agency of Normalization.
Training of ACEP agents on index insurance including the subscription and reporting process.
The acquisition and installation of 220 rain gauges by Naatal Mbay in collaboration with the AMC (Affaires Mondiales-Canada) will enable full coverage of the area and thus facilitate the development of this new approach to the distribution of index insurance policies in the SFZ.
In the areas of Podor and Matam, the networks are working to set up the group purchasing system.
On irrigated rice, especially in the delta, the focus shifted to FPA which has 14,000 members and is already engaged in contracting.
ICT solutions defined and developed to support productivity and competitiveness of VC.
The networks benefiting from the equipment credit of CFAF 73 million from the CNCAS during the pilot phase began to repay the first installments.
A request is expected for support to the roll-out of the communications plan produced by a Naatal Mbay consultant in FY16.
The seed financing mechanism elaborated in March by all stakeholders is still being validated by CNCAS.
The project team provided inputs to USAID/Senegal's high level and most compelling results on Global Climate Change Adaptation (GCC-AD).
Private Sector Investments Increased During this quarter, Feed the Future Senegal took cutting-edge steps toward increasing private sector investment as a development strategy through provision of needed business development services and training, fostering business-to-business (B2B) linkages, and strengthening the capacity of the producer organizations.
Training of the candidate organizations in USAID contract management and relevant contract clauses relative to IDIQ, Fixed Price Defined Deliverable, Cost reimbursable fixed duration, and Cost plus agreements.
The following section summarizes the highlights and milestones attained during the third quarter of FY17 for the three technical components of the Naatal Mbay project.
More than 322 spots on index insurance were broadcast in 10 local languages in 14 community radios in Casamance and in the southern groundnut basin.
They represented 52 per cent of the partners sponsored by the project at FIARA 2017 where they sold 181 tons of white rice for an estimated value of US$ 120,382 and conclude contracts worth US$ 1,173,830 for 2,341 tons.
Study on ICT solutions in promoting cereal value chains.
Facilitation of the access to finance for acquisition of small agricultural equipment and integration of partner networks into the DGE agricultural kits program piloted by ASPRODEB.
On the sidelines of the GLEE 2017 Africa Market Systems international conference held from 5 to 8 June 2017 in Dakar, a field visit was organized for participants on 9 and 10 June 2017 in the Senegal River Valley.
The financial outlays to the maize sector currently performs below expectations, mainly due to the relative stagnation in the Saloum zone and the limited commercial orientation of Casamance farmers.
Farmer owned Consolidation Networks and community level contract management: In FY17, partnerships with the networks have been based on lessons learned from the first two years.
22 managers and leaders of FPA were trained in the use of smartphones to accompany CNCAS in the establishment of a database on private rice farmers in the Senegal River Valley.
Naatal Mbay carried out in March 2017 with ASPRODEB a series of data quality assessment missions commonly referred to as DQA, on a sample of 17 partner networks.
Expansion of ICT enabled crop field data collection systems in partnership with Consolidation Networks.
Filling the capacity gaps observed during the OCA by the implementation of LCD-FPA activities, will be an important step towards the signature of IDIQ.
Training of Water Union and Farmer Group leadership, and their membership, in contract farming framework and associated collective input procurement management systems.
This leasing desk is a central component of the Bank's strategic plan, which is being developed based on the MoU between Naatal Mbay and CNCAS.
(Focus on Mid/Upper SRV and groups).
Support to the implementation of retail distribution points in remote areas of the FTF zone of influence.
Given the convincing results of this pilot phase, CNCAS plans-again with the support of Naatal Mbay-to expand the experience while making third party holding a requirement for industrial rice millers wishing to benefit from a marketing credit for the year 2017.
The discussions held in the Wolof language involved four women leaders as panelists: (President of the Women's producers of Ross Bethio, President of the Northern Women's Farmers Network, Director of DBF Agro-Industries and Head of the women members of Assolucer).
In Q3, Locafrique provided financing for an aggregate amount of CFAF 2,418,734,302, of which CFAF 2,132,108,109 (88%) was investment credit for 30 companies and CFAF 286,625,400 (or 12%) of cash credit for 6 companies.
It is planned to extend the database-centered monitoring system to three federations of ASPRODEB.
Specific tailor-made actions with different timelines are proposed to promote better compliance with environment rules set forth by the Government of Senegal and USAID.
In the central zone, Déggé Saf Sap Network has a new millet processing unit.
Pencum Bamboug maize producers network suspended in 2016 was readmitted as well as Keur Samba Guèye maize producers network that was suspended in 2015.
Study produced and presented to the FTF Senegal team.
1 women's group (Manko) was linked to PUDC project and received a millet processing unit.
Other member networks of the RNCPS and CCAC have finalized their expression of needs for the acquisition of new agricultural kits including post-harvest equipment.
This outcome stated in the Naatal Mbay SOW is of a cross-cutting nature, which is addressed by the activities planned below.
More specifically, the draft report confirms that the solutions promoted by Naatal Mbay are designed with the users, built for sustainability, and data-driven.
President of the Women's Union of Ross Bethio, President of the Network of Women Agriculturists of the North (REFAN), Director of DBF Agro-Industries and, Head of Women of Assolucer, Producers of rainfed rice were invited for this program produced at FIARA 2017.
5 urban markets have been selected and the Ministry of Commerce, through the Department of Internal Trade, is developing the lists of wholesalers and retailers who will be involved.
1 women's group (Takku Liguey) built with equity funds the necessary infrastructures for rice processing a shelter for their new mill and a warehouse).
The validation workshops mobilized 15 partners in Ziguinchor and 17 in Sédhiou and the protocol is being finalized.
Besides, in collaboration with the NGO Winrock International, two training workshops have been organized respectively in Kaolack and Kolda.
The first series of POs for the computerized and physical monitoring of paddy rice stocks for the in-kind repayment of credits have come to an end and the Bank was satisfied with the results.
A PO was signed with KASEC to monitor the traceability of millet and maize seeds in the central zone 17 ZFS Reinforce the capacity of DRDR in the management for the field control process for certified seeds.
The TSP and its governance charter were shared with stakeholders in the irrigated rice seed value chain in Matam in collaboration to CIRIZ and URIS.
They are complemented by personnel located in the geographic focal zones of Podor, Matam and Kaolack.
4 women leaders from the SRV and the SFZ participated in a radio-phonic debate organized during the FIARA on the contribution of women in the National Program for Rice Self-sufficiency.
It must be noted that in the SRV, the effective zone of intervention (ZOI) concerns communities with direct access to irrigated farmland suited to rice production and therefore consists in a much narrower band along the river, from Saint-Louis to Matam.
Sharing of information in GTP (Kolda and MYF).
A tour was conducted with CORIS Bank, which pre-selected two credit application files for the acquisition of state-of-the-art equipment for rice processing and construction of storage warehouses.
This concerns 7a, FODDE, ASPRODEB, SYMBIOSE, IPAR, CNAAS and CGER.
Thus, FEPROBA sold more than 2700 tons of paddy and seeds to SODEFITEX and the State through the PNAR.
Promotion of financial services to farmers by the Financial Institutions: The consolidation of the various financial and non-financial mechanisms put in place with the support of Naatal Mbay continued.
Participation and support to the periodic meetings of the FTF communicate on activities and share experiences on specific themes relate to agriculture policy and the respective mandate of each project.
Technical Director of SODAGRI-Vice-President of the Federation of Producers of the Anambé Basin (FEPROBA) and Head of South Zone Network of CNCAS were the guests of this communication event that was a great success.
The Consultant working on ICT solutions for agriculture using Naatal Mbay as case study released a first draft for review.
5 partner networks attended FIARA: Kissal Patim, Assolucer, Feproba, Entente Diouloulou and Symbiose.
A first restitution was carried out in Saint-Louis on the results of the feasibility study of an index agricultural insurance scheme based on yields.
A radio debate on the contribution and challenges of women in the rice self-sufficiency program was carried out in the Wolof language on Sen Radio's "Waar-Wi" program.
In the Southern Forest Zone, the well-known results of the MFI laid the foundation for its replication beyond the Anambé Basin and the semi-rainfed rice value chain.
The project sponsored 15 rice partners, including 9 women at FIDAK held in December 2016.
With the support of the project, CNCAS continues to consolidate the contractual schemes around which its new credit policy is built.
Intensification of "Le Chemin du Bon Riz" best practice training in the Podor and Matam zones and selected groups of the Lower Delta for DS 2017 and RS 2017.
The Naatal Mbay Geo-referenced database and other datasets generated by field studies are uploaded and validated by the USAID DDL.
Half was mobilized for the International Women's Economic Empowerment Global Learning Forum held in Bangkok in May 2017.
Participation of technical staff to meetings and expert consultations organized or supported by USAID/EGO.
SRV Water Unions and Farmer Groups are trained and implement farm gate rice norms and standards through adapted testing tools and traceability protocols.
A meeting was held with the MCA second compact formulation team for inputs on gender issues and energy needs to address in the next generation of agricultural support projects.
Naatal Mbay sponsored a TV debate in the "Li Ci Penc Mi" program of the private television channel Futurs Médias (TFM) on 6 April 2017.
The project teams in Dakar and the regions were requested to identify key issues on which the investigations should focus.
After three weeks marked by a highly the exhibitors were able to directly sell 388 tons worth 121,576,170 FCFA and to register orders worth 3127 tons for 792,715,000 FCFA.
Three boutiques installed (Kolda, Sedhiou, Ziguinchor).
Naatal Mbay sponsored the participation of 24 rice firms in the 2017 edition of FIARA, each of them with its own commercial brands.
Commercial Fairs and Promotion:-6 partner networks of millet and maize CVs at the Kaolack International Fair (FIKA)-February 2017.
Galvanized by these encouraging results, the Company intends, with the support of Naatal Mbay, to improve the contractual system, scale-up the operations to 50 ha in the medium term and develop long term business partnership with financial institutions.
To date, more than 322 spots on index insurance have been aired in 10 local languages through 14 community radio stations in Casamance and in the Groundnut Basin.
The season debriefing value chain workshops were held in March 2017 and the reporting was done in FY17Q2 Field and exchange visits are organized.
ASPRODEB finalized the recruitment of 16 contractors for the 2017/18 campaign.
As part of the partnership with CINSERE, new tools to better monitor activities related to climate change were added to the facilitators handbook.
Response to solicitations by Government of Senegal authorities and public sector partners in activities related to the development of cereal Value Chains (MAER, Min.
Commerce, BOS/PSE, APIX, Local governance authorities, etc.) Ad hoc responses.
Use of Agriculture Insurance services expanded.
Establish a reference situation and a monitoring plan for environmental compliance in the main industrial rice milling and seed processing units supported by Naatal Mbay.
Other member networks of the RNCPS and CCAC have finalized their needs expressions for the acquisition of new agricultural kits including post-harvest equipment.
5 women’s groups (GIE Khar Yalla Guèye, FPA, GIE Takku Liguey, Al Thiaka, Union des GIE de Femmes Productrices de Ross Béthio) were trained in financial management and financial education.
Development of POs and consultancy mandates for the improvement of internal processes in the perspective of correcting OCA weaknesses.
With 200 additional rain gauges provided by ANACIM, the Multidisciplinary Working Groups of Kolda and Medina Yora Foula are now used to share and disseminate climate information.
In total, the project partner networks in the ZFS were able to mobilize during the quarter nearly 681 million FCFA distributed as follows:-628 million allocated to FEPROBA,-18 million to Entente Diouloulou-10 million to Blouf Emano by the CNCAS-25 million received by COOPAD from COPEC.
The implementation of the CSC 2017 pre-season contract between a rice paddy and the Boundoum union entered its active phase with the start of the harvest.
Naatal Mbay sponsored the participation of 24 rice firms in the 2017 edition of FIARA, each of them with its own commercial brands.
ICT usage reinforced at network level to improve information processing and feedback to the field.
Naatal Mbay organized two workshops in collaboration with the partner networks of the irrigated rice value chain on 19 and 20 April 2017 respectively in the middle valley and the delta.
After labeling its product under the commercial rice brand "Koura", GIE Yoonu Toll participated in the 2017 edition of the International Fair of Agriculture and Animal Resources held in Dakar.
Two EIGs of women (Manko and Dimbal Jaboot) received millet processing equipment from PUDC and PNAR.
To increase women's leadership and to train leaders in public speaking, Naatal Mbay organized a radio-phonic debate at FIARA 2017 on the theme "Women's contribution to the National Rice Self-sufficiency Program".
Development and piloting of ICT enabled crop field data collection systems in partnership with water user union federation FPA and selected millers.
The debate in Wolof language focused on the expansion of rice in the south with the implementation of the integrated financing model of the Anambé Basin.
To this end, the fifty delegates visited a number of partner organizations, including the Union of Women of Pont Gendarme, the Union of Women Producers of Ross Béthio, the Seed processing unit of Richard Toll, the GIE Malal rice factory Yoro GUEYE, DBF Agro-Industries, GIE Thiaytou, the Sope Nabi rice mill, Ets CNT Suarl and the Diama emissary funded under the MCA.
Expansion of access to input lending mechanisms: Seasonal credit for CSC 2017 on irrigated rice amounts to 6,812,833,550 FCFA.
They brought 8 tons of white rice and sold 5 tons for a value of 1 655,225 FCFA 18 Support to the organization of a Rice Caravan covering urban centers of Casamance to promote locally processed rice.
Review of rice, maize and millet technical recommendations to include sustainable farming techniques and NRM approaches protecting tree cover.
This support consisted in putting at their disposal a prominent booth labeled "RICE of SENEGAL" with individual branded stands for each company, in addition to a common space dedicated to commercial negotiations.
2 women's groups (Union des femmes productrices de Saré Bidji, Ndimbal Jaboot) were linked with PADER and PNAR projects respectively and each received a decorticator of rice.
Enlargement workshops have been organized in the Ziguinchor and Sédhiou zones and protocols of agreement between the key stakeholders identified are being finalized.
Technical Director of SODAGRI-Vice-President of the Federation of Producers of the Anambé Basin (FEPROBA) and Head of South Zone Network of CNCAS were the panelists.
116 animators including 23 women were trained on the management of manual rain gauges by ANACIM in the framework of the partnership with CINSERE.
Capacity building plan development and implementation for the candidate organizations applying for full determination of responsibility as USAID implementers.
During the Africa Market Systems GLEE, long-time Feed the Future and NASAN partner greets USAID staff and partners during a 2-day tour of the SRV organized by Naatal Mbay.
The seed associations, the DRDR, the seed controllers and the seed processing centers implement a traceability for the distribution of certified seeds to end users.
Study produced and presented to the FTF Senegal team.
The training sessions registered 189 participants including 21 women in the Velingara-Kolda-MYF zone, 127 in the Kaolack-Nioro zone and 25 in Kaffrine zone.
51 networks received project support in Q3 (23 in Dagana, 15 in Podor, and 13 in Matam).
Concrete examples are the Wassadou and Patiana valley projects.
In total, Naatal Mbay supports 66 partner networks in the SFZ and 52 in the SRV.
5 partner networks attended FIARA: Kissal Patim, Assolucer, Feproba, Entente Diouloulou and Symbiose.
Implementation relies on two regional offices: Saint-Louis in the SRV and Kolda in the SFZ.
It is available on YouTube and the Facebook page team Naatal Mbay.
The operationalization of localized MFIs will ultimately lead to the development of a rice value chain has already enabled the partner networks to mobilize nearly 681 million FCFA distributed as follows:-628 million CFA for FEPROBA,-18 million CFA for Entente Diouloulou-10 million CFA for Blouf Emano (allocated by CNCAS)-25 million CFA for COOPAD (allocated by COPEC).
Natural Resource Management approaches improved in the targeted expansion zones.
In the Dagana area, a meeting between CIRIZ and the rice millers took place to adapt the terms of the contract to the realities of the different seasons.
308 producers of which 42 women were trained by ANACIM in the departments of Velingara, Kolda, MYF, Nioro and Kaolack.
Restructuring of the Consolidation Network extension teams to ensure specific support by women CLSPs (lead farmers and field agents) to geo-specific women production clusters.
ASSOLUCER, so far involved in rainfed rice only, made a request to enter the maize value chain.
