Integrated Country Strategy

Senegal

FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

Table of Contents
1.

Chief of Mission Priorities ................................................................................................................ 2

2.

Mission Strategic Framework .......................................................................................................... 4

3.

Mission Goals and Objectives .......................................................................................................... 5

4.

Management Objectives ................................................................................................................. 14

1
Originally Approved: August 24, 2018
Reviewed and Updated: October 15, 2020
FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

1. Chief of Mission Priorities
The U.S. Mission in Senegal has aligned its efforts to advance two principal goals: shared
security and shared prosperity. Embassy Dakar aims to make the United States and Senegal
safer and more prosperous. We base our strategy on the fundamental U.S. interest in seeing
Senegal continue to succeed as a secure, increasingly prosperous democracy and a strong
regional partner.
The goals of our Integrated Country Strategy (ICS) 2020-23 are mutually reinforcing. We
advance security by helping Senegal respond to transnational threats, by supporting peaceful
development in the Casamance, and by improving Senegal’s capacity to contribute to
multilateral peacekeeping missions. We promote joint prosperity by facilitating stronger
bilateral economic and commercial ties, an improved business climate, and continued strong,
sustainable economic growth. The Mission reinforces both principal goals by our efforts to
strengthen democratic values, human rights, and good governance, and by promoting
development through health and education. These goals are consistent with the National
Security Strategy (NSS), the State and USAID Joint Strategic Plan (JSP), and the Joint Regional
Strategy for Africa (JRS). Public Affairs plays a significant role in supporting all these objectives
through programs that promote mutual understanding and create and harness public
awareness of our work to project a positive impression and enhance the influence of the United
States. In all our activities, we seek to offer Senegal attractive alternatives to those of our
global competitors.
Senegal is an unwavering partner of the United States in promoting peace and security in West
Africa and beyond. Its military and law enforcement institutions are among the most capable in
Africa. The bilateral Defense Cooperation Agreement signed in 2016 provides the U.S. military
access to facilities and administrative procedures that allow us to respond quickly to regional
threats. Over the next three years, we will intensify cooperation to strengthen Senegal’s
capabilities in the fight against terrorism, border security, and in countering violent extremism
in the region. In the Casamance, where Senegal seeks an end to over three decades of violent
conflict, we will support efforts to end the conflict and provide development.
Senegal participates actively in multilateral diplomacy through the African Union, Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, and the
United Nations. At any time, Senegal deploys over 3,000 soldiers, gendarmes, and police
officers in support of multilateral peacekeeping missions.
Since its independence in 1960, Senegal has peacefully transferred power three times and has
not resorted to military rule. This achievement sets Senegal apart in West Africa. While
Senegal's economic growth has exceeded six percent for the past five years, it remains a lowincome country where more than 60 percent of the population is under 25 years of age. The
government recognizes that it needs to provide better education, healthcare, and employment
opportunities for its youth, and to create the conditions for sustainable private sector
2
Originally Approved: August 24, 2018
Reviewed and Updated: October 15, 2020
FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

development to move Senegal in the ranks of lower middle-income countries. U.S. government
programming in Senegal supports these goals.
Strengthening bilateral economic and commercial ties in pursuit of joint prosperity is a top
priority for the Mission and for the Government of Senegal. President Sall’s Plan Sénégal
Emergent (PSE) is an ambitious development blueprint for transforming Senegal into an
emerging economy by 2035; a focus in the second phase of the PSE on enabling the private
sector combined with new oil and gas field discoveries present important opportunities for U.S.
firms. To reap the benefits of these opportunities and respond to challenges presented by our
global competitors, we facilitate U.S. private sector-led deals that yield a high return on
investment for both U.S. and Senegalese partners.
We seek to expand two-way trade to grow Senegal’s economy and generate new opportunities
for U.S. businesses. We seek to improve the business climate and reduce barriers to
investment and trade. These efforts strengthen economic and commercial ties are consistent
with Prosper Africa, the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA), and Power Africa. We will
leverage tools to support U.S. economic successes, including the U.S. International
Development Finance Corporation (DFC), the U.S. Export-Import Bank (EXIM), and the U.S.
Trade and Development Agency (USTDA), which have all designated Senegal as a priority
country.
Senegal’s second MCC Compact signed in December 2018 is an opportunity for the United
States to help Senegal accelerate progress toward its development goals. The $550 million
second compact will address the binding constraint impeding accelerated economic growth
posed by the high cost and insufficient and inefficient distribution of electricity. The compact
focuses on power sector reform, transmission network modernization, and rural access to
electricity.
Through USAID, the Mission manages a development assistance program that will exceed $100
million annually. USAID’s current Country Development Cooperation Strategy (CDCS) is the
foundation of this ICS and aligns closely with the Plan Sénégal Emergent. We will highlight that
our assistance efforts – in health, education, good governance, and expanding economic
opportunities – invest in the Senegalese people, in stark contrast to the activities of some of
our strategic rivals.
The Peace Corps is integral to the success of the Mission. The first Peace Corps volunteers
came to Senegal in 1963. Today more than 220 volunteers work across Senegal on agriculture,
agroforestry, health, and community economic development. Peace Corps volunteers also
support initiatives on food security, youth and gender development, and malaria prevention –
all key sub-objectives in our ICS. Most people in rural Senegal have encountered Peace Corps
volunteers. They are the most popular and effective representatives of the United States in
Senegal.
3
Originally Approved: August 24, 2018
Reviewed and Updated: October 15, 2020
FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

To implement this ICS, the Mission needs adequate resources. As Dakar becomes the preferred
base for government activities across the region, and as our economic, development, and
security engagements expand, our human resources have become increasingly
stretched. Regional engagement has been the primary driver of growth in the number of US
direct-hire employees since the Mission moved into a New Embassy Compound (NEC) in
2013. As of January 2020, Mission Senegal counts 163 direct-hire Americans and 415 Locally
Employed staff from 22 U.S. government agencies. Embassy Dakar is responsible for managing
relations with Guinea-Bissau and hosts other agencies with responsibilities in dozens of other
countries. With additional human and fiscal resources, Mission Dakar could provide expanded
surge capacity for a larger area of operations and more effectively pursue our strategic goals.
The ICASS platform at Embassy Dakar operates on a $17 million annual budget servicing all
agencies who have programs and personnel in Senegal and Guinea-Bissau. The Management
Section serves as a resource for smaller embassies in the region who have come to rely on its
experienced LE and USDH staff for direct and indirect support.

2. Mission Strategic Framework
Mission Goal 1: Make the United States and Senegal Safer
Mission Objective 1.1: Increase the Effectiveness of Senegal’s Response to Transnational
Threats and Support Security and Peace in the Casamance
Mission Objective 1.2: Improve Senegal’s Capacity to Participate in Peacekeeping
Operations
Mission Objective 1.3: Create the Safest Possible Environment for U.S. Citizens in Senegal
and the United States
Mission Goal 2: Make the United States and Senegal More Prosperous
Mission Objective 2.1: Strengthened Economic and Commercial Ties
Mission Objective 2.2: Increased Inclusive Economic Growth (CDCS DO 1)
Mission Objective 2.3: Improved Business Climate in Senegal
Mission Goal 3: Strengthen Democratic Values, Human Rights and Good Governance
Mission Objective 3.1: Partner with Senegal to Promote Effective and Equitable Governance
to Promote Democratic Values (including CDCS DO 3 / IR 2)
Mission Objective 3.2: Strong Justice Sector as Foundation for Rule of Law
4
Originally Approved: August 24, 2018
Reviewed and Updated: October 15, 2020
FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

Mission Goal 4: Promote Development Through Health and Education
Mission Objective 4.1: Improved Health Status of the Senegalese Population
(CDCS DO 2)
Mission Objective 4.2: Improved Education, Training, and Leadership for Senegalese Youth
(including CDCS DO 3 / IR 1)
Management Objective 1: Be the AF Bureau’s model for a safe, healthy, and efficient work
environment
Management Objective 2: Work together to create cohesive and innovate solutions that add
value, address Mission priorities, and support regional needs
Management Objective 3: Improve communication with stakeholders and leverage key
relationships to become a center of management excellence

3. Mission Goals and Objectives
Mission Goal 1: Make the United States and Senegal Safer
Description and Linkages:
Senegal’s geographic location presents a series of security risks, and U.S. efforts under
this goal serve to ensure Senegal’s continued safety, security, and stability. A stable
Senegal, in turn, helps to ensure protection of U.S. citizens and interests. Efforts under
this Goal will help secure the country’s restive Casamance region, help prevent the
spread of violent extremist ideologies, increase the capacity of Senegalese securityservice personnel to prevent and respond to threats, help secure Senegal’s borders
including its maritime borders and increase aviation security, and encourage Senegal to
play a stabilizing role in the sub-region, and ensure the safety of U.S. citizens in Senegal
and the United States.
This ICS goal is fully aligned with Goal 1 of the FY 2018-2022 State/USAID Joint Strategic
Plan (“Protect America’s Security at Home and Abroad” – pp. 23-33 of document) and
contributes to Goal 3.1 by building a stronger security partner. It is also fully aligned
with Goal 1 of the Department of State/USAID Joint Regional Strategy for Africa
(“Advance Mutual Peace and Security Interests”) and Pillar 1 of the National Security
Strategy (“Protect the American People, the Homeland, and the American Way of Life”).

5
Originally Approved: August 24, 2018
Reviewed and Updated: October 15, 2020
FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

Mission Objective 1.1: Increase the Effectiveness of Senegal’s Response to Transnational
Threats and Support Security and Peace in the Casamance
Justification:
Senegal’s military and civilian security services are among the most effective in West
Africa. Sustaining and improving this capability are critical to maintaining security across
the region. Senegal’s borders are long and porous, and its neighbors generally have
fragile security institutions. Senegal also has maritime borders which are difficult to
monitor and police. As a result, Senegal is vulnerable to trans-national threats such as
terrorism, drug trafficking, and organized crime. Building Senegal’s capacity to respond
to trans-national threats improves the country’s capacity to achieve its development
goals, promotes good governance, and enhances regional stability. The Defense
Cooperation Agreement (DCA) with Senegal also provides a unique opportunity to
strengthen the bilateral relationship while ensuring access to facilities that will support
USG operations in the region.
Attacks in the region and threats from Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM), alMurabitun, and Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), demonstrate that Senegal is
not immune to regional terrorism threats. Furthermore, al-Murabitun has publicly
threatened attacks in Senegal. Senegalese youth have travelled to Libya to join ISIL and
to Nigeria to train with Boko Haram, raising concerns they could return to launch attacks
in the country.
West Africa is also a transit point for cocaine trafficking between Latin America and
Europe. Published reports indicate that in excess of $900 million worth of illicit drugs
moves between Africa and Europe annually. Seizures of hard drugs increased
significantly in Senegal in 2019. Drug-trafficking on this scale undermines the ability of
countries in West Africa to maintain their own internal peace and security. Senegal is
also a source, transit, and destination country for children and women who are
subjected to forced labor, forced begging, and sex trafficking.
In addition to trafficking in persons and drugs, organized crime elements and terrorist
groups also exploit porous borders and weak security services across the region.
Strengthening aviation and maritime security will bolster a holistic approach to
maintaining peace and security in Senegal. Strengthening Senegal’s maritime domain
awareness and its enforcement of maritime laws will combat illegal fishing, illicit
trafficking, and the flow of narcotics. In the face of rapidly evolving trans-national
threats, Senegal must continue to strengthen its security services, coordinate action
with regional neighbors, work to secure its borders, counter violent extremism, and
reduce crime. In the aviation domain, countering terrorist threats of non-metallic
improvised explosive devices and providing aviation security training and screening will
reduce this vulnerability. Effective action in these areas will also contribute to
resolution of the decades-long conflict in Senegal’s Casamance region. A peaceful
6
Originally Approved: August 24, 2018
Reviewed and Updated: October 15, 2020
FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

settlement in the Casamance will boost both economic performance and capacity to
support multilateral peacekeeping missions.
Addressing transnational threats posed by cybercrime and poor cybersecurity through
technical assistance will enhance our effectiveness in achieving a response to transnational threats and crime.
The Department of Homeland Security (DHS/TSA) will lead the effort for this objective,
working in partnership with the Department of Justice, Regional Security Officer, Office
of Security Cooperation, Political Section, Economic Section, Public Affairs Office, and
Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA). The primary measure of progress toward this
objective is Senegal’s increased capacity to respond to threats both inside and outside
its national territory.

Mission Objective 1.2: Improve Senegal’s Capacity to Participate in Peacekeeping Operations
Justification:
Senegal is a leading contributor to multilateral peacekeeping missions, providing multiple
military units and foreign formed police units (FPUs) to UN, AU and ECOWAS missions. The
African Peacekeeping Rapid Response Program (APRRP) brings a large amount of resources to
Senegal over the next two years in support of increasing the speed and effectiveness that
Senegal can respond to crises throughout Africa. By helping Senegal build its capacity to train
for and deploy to peacekeeping operations, the United States helps advance peace and security
in Africa and beyond.
The U.S. currently plays a significant role in pre-deployment training of military units and FPUs
bound for UN missions. In our continuing engagement, the Mission will help Senegal develop its
internal capacity to generate, train, and sustain peace support forces. Senegal should improve
its procedures for refitting of redeployed equipment and management of equipment stocks to
ensure that equipment remains available for the next deployment.
The Office of Security Cooperation leads the effort for this objective, with support from the
Defense Attaché, the Political Section, the Force Protection Detachment (FPD), and the
Executive Office. The primary measure of progress toward this objective is the development of
an internal capacity to store, maintain, generate forces, and deploy in support of peacekeeping
missions globally.

Mission Objective 1.3: Create the Safest Possible Environment for U.S. Citizens in Senegal and
the United States
Justification:
Providing consular services to U.S. citizens is an essential function of U.S. Missions worldwide.
As the Mission works to advance peace and security in the region, it is vital to maintain focus on
the safety of U.S. citizens in Senegal. Ensuring their access to consular services, especially in
7
Originally Approved: August 24, 2018
Reviewed and Updated: October 15, 2020
FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

emergency situations, is the key element of this objective. Furthermore, as outlined in the
most recent JSP, providing safety and security messages to U.S. citizens allows them to make
informed decisions about their own activities. The Mission’s outreach to Senegalese publicsafety agencies and first responders on issues related to American citizens also complements
our broader efforts to build capacity and professionalism in the security sector.
U.S. relationships, activities, and agreements ensuring access to and through Senegal directly
increase the safety of the United States by allowing U.S. Department of Defense forces to
posture for humanitarian response, evacuation support or onward movement in support of
operations globally.
The Consular Section leads the effort for this objective, with support from the Political Section,
Regional Security Officer, Public Affairs, the Office of Security Cooperation, and the Executive
Office.
Mission Goal 2: Make the United States and Senegal More Prosperous
Description and Linkages:
Post’s efforts under this goal will advance key goals under the FY 2018-2022
Department of State/USAID Joint Strategic Plan, in particular Goal 2 (“Renew America’s
Competitive Advantage for Sustained Economic Growth and Job Creation”). This Goal is
also aligned with Goal 2 of the Department of State/USAID Joint Regional Strategy for
Africa (“Increase Mutually Beneficial Economic Growth, Trade, and Investment”).
Activities under this Goal will support making the U.S. and Senegal more prosperous by
strengthening economic and commercial ties with a focus on private sector-led trade
and investment deals; promoting sustainable, inclusive economic growth; and
accelerating economic development by making Senegal a more attractive place to do
business; and strengthening the trade and investment relationship between the U.S.
and Senegal in order to expand economic opportunity in both countries.
Mission Objective 2.1: Strengthened Economic and Commercial Ties
Justification:
Strengthening bilateral economic and commercial ties in pursuit of joint prosperity is a
top priority for the Mission and for the Government of Senegal, and a key component of
the Prosper Africa strategy. President Sall’s Plan Sénégal Emergent (PSE) is an ambitious
development blueprint for transforming Senegal into an emerging economy by 2035; a
focus in the second phase of the PSE on enabling the private sector presents important
opportunities for U.S. firms. To reap the benefits of these opportunities and respond to
challenges presented by our global competitors, the Embassy-led interagency Deal
Team facilitates U.S. private sector-led deals that yield a high return on investment for
both U.S. and Senegalese partners.
8
Originally Approved: August 24, 2018
Reviewed and Updated: October 15, 2020
FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

We seek to expand two-way trade to stimulate Senegal’s economy and generate new
opportunities for U.S. businesses. American firms are most successful in Senegal when
they develop local partnerships, build local capacity, and respond to the GOS’s desire to
create local employment. We seek to improve the business climate and reduce barriers
to investment and trade. These efforts build on initiatives such as Prosper Africa, the
African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA), and Power Africa. We will leverage tools
to support U.S. economic successes, including the U.S. International Development
Finance Corporation (DFC), the U.S. Export-Import Bank (EXIM), and the U.S. Trade and
Development Agency (USTDA), all of which have designated Senegal as a priority
country.
Mission Objective 2.2: Increased Inclusive Economic Growth (CDCS DO 1)
Justification:
Post’s activities under this objective support making the U.S. and Senegal more
prosperous through sustainable, inclusive economic growth. For Senegal to achieve
sustained economic growth that brings broad benefits to the entire population, the
following are essential: increasing agricultural productivity; expanding markets; creating
high-quality jobs; increasing resilience and food security for local populations
(incorporating improved nutrition into food security efforts and an emphasis on
mitigating the effects of climate change); developing quality infrastructure, including
through private sector investment; and promoting entrepreneurship.
Activities for this objective are aligned with U.S. Presidential initiatives such as Feed the
Future, Prosper Africa and Power Africa, directives from Congress on biodiversity, water,
sanitation, and hygiene, and GOS priorities as outlined in the Accelerated Growth
Strategy, Country Investment Plan for Agriculture, and the Plan Sénégal Emergent.
USAID, USDA, MCC, ECON and PAS contribute to this objective.
Link to USAID Country Development Cooperation Strategy (CDCS): This objective
corresponds to USAID CDCS Development Objective (DO) #1. The CDCS can be found
here: http://www.usaid.gov/results-and-data/planning/country-strategies-cdcs. The
related CDCS development hypothesis is that if agricultural productivity improves, if
private-sector trade increases, if the management of natural resources improves, and if
the nutritional status of women and children improves, then local populations will be
more food secure and play a larger role in an expanding economy. Note that USAID will
develop a new CDCS during the term of this ICS, and the ICS will be updated accordingly
when the new CDCS is complete.

9
Originally Approved: August 24, 2018
Reviewed and Updated: October 15, 2020
FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

Mission Objective 2.3: Improved Business Climate in Senegal
Justification:
Making Senegal a more attractive place to do business will accelerate economic
development, create opportunities for U.S. firms, and promote mutual prosperity. The
Plan Sénégal Emergent is an ambitious development blueprint that explicitly calls upon
the private sector to diversify Senegal’s economy and create jobs. To achieve this
vision, it is vital that Senegal make its economy more attractive to investment from both
domestic and external sources.
As the business climate improves, Senegal will offer more business opportunities to
American entrepreneurs seeking to trade with and invest in Africa. Several key sectors –
including oil and gas, infrastructure, tourism, and technology -- offer important
opportunities for U.S. firms and should be a focus of reform and capacity building.
Given USG initiatives such as the MCC Power Compact and USAID’s Power Africa
program, Senegal’s power sector is an important focus of business-climate reform.
These programs, especially when complemented by greater U.S. commercial
engagement, will help Senegal strengthen the power sector by increasing reliability and
access of the supply of electricity while lowering costs.
Mission efforts serving this objective will take into account the objectives of U.S.
government development finance institutions such as the DFC and EXIM Bank, and
MCC’s goals as set out in a second Compact with Senegal. Mission activities are aligned
with Senegal’s Accelerated Growth Strategy, the Plan Sénégal Emergent, USAID’s
Country Development Cooperation Strategy, and the Power Africa initiative.
The Economic-Commercial Section leads the effort for this objective, with support from
USAID, MCC, USDA, the Political Section, the Public Affairs Section, the Executive Office,
and other sections as appropriate. The primary measure of progress toward this
objective is the level of private U.S. commercial engagement with Senegal as measured
by the volume of commercial services delivered.
Mission Goal 3: Strengthen Democratic Values, Human Rights and Good Governance
Description and Linkages:
Post’s efforts under this goal will advance key goals under the FY 2018-2022
Department of State/USAID Joint Strategic Plan (JSP), in particular Goal 1 (“Protect
America’s Security at Home and Abroad”), but also Goals 2 (“Renew America’s
Competitive Advantage for Sustained Economic Growth and Job Creation”) and 3
(“Promote American Leadership through Balanced Engagement”).
These efforts will help strengthen citizen-responsive governance, security, democracy,
human rights, and rule of law (Strategic Objective 1.3 of the JSP). They will also combat
10
Originally Approved: August 24, 2018
Reviewed and Updated: October 15, 2020
FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

corruption (Strategic Objective 2.3) and increase partnerships with civil society
organizations to mobilize support and resources and shape foreign public opinion
(Strategic Objective 3.3). Post’s efforts under this goal are also aligned with Goal 3 of
the Department of State/USAID Joint Regional Strategy for Africa (“Strengthen
Democracy, Human Rights, and Good Governance”).
Efforts under this goal fall in line with the U.S. National Security Strategy (NSS) and will
encourage reform, promote effective governance, seek to improve the rule of law, and
support the continued development of institutions accountable and responsive to
citizens in order to support economic development and opportunities, diminish the
attraction of illegal migration, and reduce vulnerability to extremists.

Mission Objective 3.1: Partner with Senegal to Promote Effective and Equitable Governance
to Promote Democratic Values (including CDCS DO 3 / IR 2)
Justification:
This objective supports the strategic goal of advancing democratic values. A political
system founded on democratic institutions requires that citizens participate in
governance. As such, activities under this objective will be critical to ensure continued
stability and preserve democratic consolidation in Senegal. More broadly, activities
under this objective will enhance good governance through increased citizen
participation in the management of public affairs at national and local levels, in
particular regarding elections and government transparency, and will support the GOS’s
capacity to respond to such demands with stronger public financial management
systems and accessible fiscal information. The USG will support Senegal’s
decentralization efforts through engagement with political stakeholders and capacity
building for local officials.
Activities under this objective also serve to protect human rights by increasing the
capacity of Senegalese institutions to counter discrimination and combat trafficking in
persons, with a focus on women and children.
USAID and the Political and Public Affairs Sections lead the effort for this objective, with
support from the executive office, law enforcement agencies, and other embassy
stakeholders as appropriate.
Link to USAID Country Development Cooperation Strategy (CDCS): Sub-objective 3.1.1
corresponds to USAID CDCS Development Objective (DO) #3, Intermediate Result (IR)
#2. Note that USAID will develop a new CDCS during the term of this ICS. While the
current CDCS includes democracy and governance and education activities under a
single DO (DO #3), democracy and governance and education activities will be included
in two separate DOs in the new CDCS. Therefore, these activities have been separated
11
Originally Approved: August 24, 2018
Reviewed and Updated: October 15, 2020
FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

and placed within two different ICS Goals: Goal 3 for democracy and governance; and
Goal 4 for education.
Mission Objective 3.2: Strong Justice Sector as Foundation for Rule of Law
Justification:
This objective supports the strategic goal of advancing democratic values. A significant
measure of Senegal’s success is how well the government meets its citizens’
expectations of transparent governance by leaders who can be held to account through
the rule of law. Combatting corruption and strengthening the foundations of the rule of
law in Senegal are important for the bilateral relationship and for Senegal’s leadership
role in the region. When the justice system and law enforcement agencies work
effectively, the prospects for economic development also improve. Additionally, using
U.S. resources to build capacity and professionalism in law-enforcement agencies and
the courts gives the United States a stronger partner to rely on when we request
assistance to protect our own citizens and national security. The U.S. government will
support these efforts through technical assistance and capacity building.
The Department of Justice (OPDAT, FBI and DEA) leads the effort for this objective, with
support from the Political Section, the Regional Security Office, the Public Affairs
Section, USAID, and the Executive Office.

Mission Goal 4: Promote Development through Health and Education
Description and Linkages:
The lack of essential services and economic opportunities can lead to health crises and
increases in mass migration to the United States and can serve as a motivating factor for
young people to be drawn to extremist groups. By promoting health and education,
U.S. assistance under this Goal fights poverty, drives inclusive economic growth and
opens markets for U.S. investments, counters the root causes of violent extremism, and
accelerates Senegal’s progress toward its development goals.
This Goal is fully aligned with broader USG priorities, specifically: Goal 2 of the FY 20182022 Department of State / USAID Joint Strategic Plan, and more specifically, Strategic
Objective 2.2 (“Promote healthy, educated and productive populations in partner
countries to drive inclusive and sustainable development, open new markets and
support U.S. prosperity and security objectives”). In addition, Post’s activities are
aligned with Goal 4 of the Department of State / USAID Joint Regional Strategy for Africa
(“Promote Inclusive Country-led Development”), and U.S. National Security Strategy
(NSS) priorities of promoting health security, and partnering with countries so they can
improve the provision of quality basic services to their citizens (NSS page 9, 52).
12
Originally Approved: August 24, 2018
Reviewed and Updated: October 15, 2020
FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

Mission Objective 4.1: Improved Health Status of the Senegalese Population (CDCS DO 2)
Justification:
Post’s programs under this objective focus on improving the health of Senegal’s
population, strengthening the Senegalese health system, and protecting against the
spread of pandemic diseases. Activities specifically aim to increase access to quality
health services and the commitment of individuals and communities in the management
of their own health and health systems; strengthen the management and performance
of the health system and security related to infectious disease threats; and improve
nutrition, with a particular focus on women and children. USG investments will help the
GOS take on an increasingly larger role in providing sustainable, quality health services
at the regional, national and district levels. All of Post’s efforts are aligned with the GOS
Ministry of Health National Health Development Plan and the Plan Sénégal Emergent.
In addition, Post (through USAID) is an active participant in the Global Fund’s Country
Coordinating Mechanism (CCM) in Senegal, providing technical expertise to the CCM
team to improve grant implementation and to help with governance and oversight.
USAID, CDC, USDA, and OSC all contribute to this objective. Note that this objective also
includes a specific sub-objective to capture support for the implementation of the
Global Health Security Agenda to improve Senegal’s ability to prevent, detect and
respond to outbreaks and other public health threats.
Link to USAID Country Development Cooperation Strategy (CDCS): This objective
corresponds to USAID CDCS Development Objective (DO) #2. The CDCS can be found
here: http://www.usaid.gov/results-and-data/planning/country-strategies-cdcs. The
related CDCS development hypothesis is that if strategic investments are made to
strengthen the performance of the health system, increase access to high quality
priority health services and products, and increase commitment of individuals and
communities in the management of their own health and health services, then the
health status of women, children and other vulnerable populations will be improved.
Note that USAID will develop a new CDCS during the term of this ICS, and the ICS will be
updated accordingly when the new CDCS is complete.

Mission Objective 4.2: Improved Education, Training, and Leadership for Senegalese Youth
(including CDCS DO 3 / IR 1)
Justification:
Post’s activities under this objective focus on improving basic reading skills, increasing
access to quality education, and helping develop the next generation of Senegal’s
leaders, particularly young women. As a result, young people learn the skills they need
to lead productive lives, gain employment, and positively contribute to society. With
respect to basic education activities, Post’s work is aimed at improving reading skills in
13
Originally Approved: August 24, 2018
Reviewed and Updated: October 15, 2020
FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

early primary grades, increasing equitable access to education in the regions of
Southern Senegal, and strengthening performance of the system for improved delivery
of basic education services. In addition, Post programs invest in youth to ensure
Senegal has a cadre of emerging leaders with the skills necessary to participate in an
increasingly globalized economy.
Post activities empower the alumni of USG exchange programs, such as the Young
African Leaders Initiative (YALI) and the International Visitor Leadership Program (IVLP),
through targeted grants to train others in their communities and to develop their
businesses. Activities in this area include increasing the scope of English language
instruction, opportunities for higher education in the U.S., and using USG exchange
programs to help cultivate the next generation of Senegal’s leaders, researchers and
contributors to the economy. All of Post’s efforts are aligned with GOS priorities as
outlined in the Plan Sénégal Emergent.
USAID, PAS, USDA, and OSC contribute to this objective. The primary measures of
progress toward this objective are the increased number of grade two students who can
demonstrate improved reading competencies, increased number of learners enrolled in
USG supported schools or equivalent non-formal settings, increased number of youth
demonstrating leadership skills, increased participants in USG skill trainings and
exchanges, and increased number of trained English teachers.
Link to USAID Country Development Cooperation Strategy (CDCS): Sub-objective 4.2.1
corresponds to USAID CDCS Development Objective (DO) #3, Intermediate Result (IR)
#1. Note that USAID will develop a new CDCS during the term of this ICS. While the
current CDCS includes democracy and governance and education activities under a
single DO (DO #3), democracy and governance and education activities will be included
in two separate DOs in the new CDCS. Therefore, these activities have been separated
and placed within two different ICS Goals: Goal 3 for democracy and governance; and
Goal 4 for education.

4. Management Objectives
Management Objective 1: Be the AF Bureau’s model for a safe, healthy, and efficient work
environment
Justification:
In order to meet high expectations from a sophisticated customer base at a busy regional post,
the Management Section must seek continual efficiency gains if we hope to maintain some
semblance of work-life balance and keep our teams motivated and focused. We cannot and will
14
Originally Approved: August 24, 2018
Reviewed and Updated: October 15, 2020
FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

not cut corners on safety and health concerns and we must work within established federal
rules and guidance when looking to do things better, faster, or cheaper. Much of our what we
do is prescribed by regulations. However, we can impact the way we live and work through
smarter solutions that focus on standardization, consolidation, and a more even distribution of
workload through minimizing vacancies and idle time at work.
Management Objective 2: Work together to create cohesive and innovative solutions that
add value, address Mission priorities, and support regional needs
Justification:
Creating innovative solutions that add value to Mission Senegal and other embassies in
the region and that address Department priorities requires the judicious application of
new technology and proven management practices. Dakar has been a pilot Post for
many Department-led initiatives over the years, a testament to the high levels of
expertise and competency in our staff. However, there remain inefficiencies and
outdated business processes from legacy systems that must be changed if we want to
become a global model of efficiency and service.
Management Objective 3: Improve communications with stakeholders and leverage key
relationships to become a center of management excellence
Justification:
Stakeholders in any endeavor determine and define success and good two-way
communication between the Management Section and all Mission Senegal stakeholders
is a prerequisite to successful achievement of our objectives. From customers to
contractors to superiors at Post and in Washington, the Management Section can do a
better job listening to concerns before designing solutions to problems. A piece of
feedback expressed consistently in customer surveys going back many years is the need
to update published guidance documents and do a better job communicating Mission
rules and procedures. This critique points to a larger and more endemic challenge: the
need to design, publish, and follow standard guidelines on knowledge management.

15
Originally Approved: August 24, 2018
Reviewed and Updated: October 15, 2020
FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

