Heliyon  7                e07436




z   Cell”ress
Contents lists available  at ScienceDirect

Heliyon

journal homepage:  www.cell.com/heliyon



A MODIS-based  scalable remote sensing method  to estimate sowing  and harvest  dates of soybean  
crops in Mato Grosso,  Brazil
Minghui  Zhang ᵃ’  ,  Gabriel  Abrahao b,  Avery  Cohn ‘,  Jake Campolo d,  Sally  Thompson ᵃ'e
Depar0nent  of  Civil  auld  Envii•onmental En$fiieerin$,   Lfni  ersifi  of  California,  
Berkeley,  CA,   USA
r'eâeral  Urti'versiry of Vicosa,  Vicosa,  Minas  Gerais,  Brazil Tufts  IJniversifi,  419 Boston 
Aye, Medford,  MA 02 Jñ5,  USA
Deporonent  of Earth Systein Science,  and  Center on Food Security  and the Environment,  Stanford 
 Universiy,  Stanford,  CA,  USA Department  of Civi   finvirorimentol nrtd Mining Engineering,  
£/riiversity  of  Western  Australia,  Western Austroliq  Austrolio



A  R  T  I  C  L  E   I  N  F  O

Keywords:
Soy cultivation Sowing  date Mato Grosso Climate change Remote  sensing
Time series analysis

A  B  S  T  R  A  C  T

Large-scale  agriculture  in  the  state  of Mato  Grosso,  Brazil  is a major  contributor  to  
global  food  supplies,  but  its continued  productivity  is vulnerable  to contracting  wet 
seasons and increased exposure  to extreme  temperatures. Sowing  dates  serve as an effective  
adaptation  strategy  to these climate  perturbations. By controlling  the weather experienced  by 
crops  and  influencing  the number  of successive  crops  that  can be  grown  in a year,  sowing  
dates can impact both individual crop yields and cropping intensities. Unfortunately, the 
spatiotemporally resolved crop phenology  data necessary  to understand  sowing  dates and  their 
relationship  to crop yield  are only available  over limited  years and regions.  To fill this 
data gap, we produce  a 500 m rainfed soy {GI ycine mcx) sowing  and harvest date  dataset  for 
Mato  Grosso  from  2004  to 2014  using  a novel  time  series  analysis  method  for  Moderate  
Reso- lution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) satellite imagery,  adapted for implementation in 
Google Earth Engine (GEE).  Our estimates  reveal that soy sowing  and harvest  dates varied widely 
(about  2 months) from field to field, confirming  the need  for  spatially  resolved  crop  timing 
 information.  An interannual  trend  toward  earlier  sowing dates  occurred  independently  of  
variations  in  wet  season  onset,  and  may  be  attributed  to  an  improvement  in logistic  or 
economic  constraints  that  previously  hampered  early  sowing.  As anticipated,  double  cropped 
 fields  in which  two  crops  are  grown  in  succession  are  planted  earlier  than  single  
cropped  fields.  This  difference  shrank, however,  as  sowing  of  single  cropped  fields  
occurred  closer  to  the  wet  season  onset  in  more  recent  years.  The analysis   offers  
insights   about   sowing   behavior   in  response   to  historical   climate   variations   which 
 could   be extended  to understand  sowing  response  under  climate  change  in Mato  Grosso.



1.    Introduction

The  response  of  agricultural  productivity  to  changing  temperature and  rainfall  regimes  
will determine  the  health  of  economies,  food  sys- tems,  and  societies  as  climate  
continues  to  warm.  Climate  change  is projected  to  negatively  impact  food  security  by  
reducing  arable  land, decreasing  mean  crop  yields  and  increasing  vulnerability   to  
extreme weather events (Schmidhuber and Tubiello, 2007); for example, in Africa and South Asia,  
temperature and rainfall shifts are expected to lower the mean  yield of major crops by 8% by  the 
2050s (Knox et al., 2012).
This future agricultural  productivity,  however,  will be influenced  by how  farmers  adapt  to  
changing  weather  regimes  within  their  diverse physical,  cultural,  and economic  contexts 
(Khanal et  al., 2018; Reidsma et  a1.,  2010).  Management  has  such  a strong  influence  on 
productivity
that farmers may be able to minimize or even reverse the harmful effects of climate change through 
a broad range of strategies,  including cultivar selection,  increased  cropping  intensity,   
improved  water  management, and nutrient and pest management (Alexander  et al., 2018; Anwar et 
at., 2013;  Borchers  et  a1.,  2014;  Hassan  and  Nhemachena,  2008;  Howden et  al.,  2007; 
Reidsma  et  al.,  2010; Thornton  et  a1.,  2018). Frequently,  a core element  of strategies  to 
mitigate climate impacts on agriculture  in- volves  changing  the  sowing  and  harvest  dates  of 
 crops,  in conjunction with changes in variety selection to adapt to the changes in photoperiod 
and growing season length. Examples spanning production systems from sorghum  in Italy (Howden  et  
a1.,  2007),  to soybean  in Austria  (Alexan- drov  et  al.,  2002),  the  US  south  east  
(Baldwin  and  Cossar,  2009),  and sub-Saharan  Africa (Waha et a1., 2013), rice in Sri Lanka 
(Dharmarathna et  a1.,  2014)  and  corn  in  the  US  midwest  (Kucharik  and  Serbin,  2008)

*  Corresponding  author.
£-moiI address:  ming9zhang@gmai1.com (M.  Zhang).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2021.e07436
Received  15 April 2021; Received  in revised  form  12 May  2021;  Accepted  25 June 2021
2405-8440/0  2021 The Author(s).  Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under 
the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/1icenses7by- nc-nd/4.0/).

M.  zhang ct o£

broadly  demonstrate  that adaptations  in sowing  dates could mitigate or reverse  the negative 
effects of climate change on production.  Typically, growers select a sowing date to optimize  the 
exposure  of crops  to bene- ficial  weather  conditions   and  avoid  exposure   to  harmful   
conditions during  sensitive  phenological  stages.  Such  exposure  can have  large  im- pacts  on 
 productivity  -  for  example,  a  1%  decrease  in  irrigated  wheat yield was observed for every 
day of delayed planting in northern India, a decline  caused  by  heat  stress  during  the  grain  
filling  period  of  crop growth (Ortiz-Monasterio et at.,  1994).
In  tropical  regions  like  Brazil,  where  crops  are  heavily  reliant  on rainfall  and  
already  experience  the  upper  limit  of  their  temperature tolerance (Challinor et al., 2014; 
Rosenzweig  et at., 2014), projections of a hotter,  drier  climate  may  limit  farmers'  ability  
to  adapt  by  adjusting sowing dates. The state of Mato Grosso in central-west Brazil, is a center 
of soy production that accounts for 27% of Brazil's and 10% of global soy supplies  (Victoria  et  
al.,  2012;  Abrahao  and  Costa,  2018;  Cohn  et  at., 2016). Soy's productivity in Mato Grosso 
depends in part on a long rainy season that facilitates double cropping systems, in which soy is 
the first of two crops grown in succession during the same year (Abrahao and Costa, 2018;  Correa  
and  Schmidt,  2014;  Arvor  et  al.,  2012b).  However,  sus- taining  this  high  productivity  
depends  in part  on whether  its intensive cropping  practices  and  high  crop  yields  can  be  
maintained  under  the shorter  wet  seasons  and  higher   temperatures   expected   with  climate 
change  (Arvor  et  a1.,  2012b,a,  Costa  and  Pires,  2010,  Dubreuil  et  at., 2012,  Gourdji  
et  al.,  2013).  Sowing  dates  form  a crucial  link  between climate  and  agricultural  
productivity  in  Mato  Grosso.  Since  adjusting sowing  dates  offers   an  effective   climate  
adaptation   strategy,   under- standing  the  current  timing  of  soy  planting  is  essential  
to  determine whether and how Mato Grosso's agricultural  systems can be sustained in the future 
(Abrahao  and Costa,  2018; Pires et at., 2016).
High-resolution  sowing  data  are  essential  to  quantify  these  climate risks to soy 
production,  but until now were unavailable  in Mato Grosso. In this paper, we produce a 500 m 
dataset of soy sowing and harvest dates over  Mato  Grosso  from  2004  to  2014.  Spatiotemporal  
patterns  in  the sowing  dates  reveal  drivers  of  sowing  behavior  (such  as  cropping  in- 
tensity  and  wet  season  onset)  that  can  be  incorporated  into  models  to improve yield 
projections under climate change.
Sowing dates play two key roles in Mato Grosso's response to a hotter and drier climate (Pires  et 
a1., 2016; Fu et at.,  2013). First, as a primary control  on  the weather  experienced  by crops,  
changing  sowing  dates  is one of the most cost-effective adaptations to climate change 
(Alexandrov et  a1.,  2002; Baldwin  and  Cossar,  2009; Howden  et  at.,  2007;  Itticharik and 
Serbin, 2008; Waha et a1., 2013; Waongo et at., 2014). Farmers may select  sowing  dates  to  avoid 
 water  and  heat  stress  during  important phenological  stages (Ortiz-Monasterio et  a1.,  
1994),  increasing  biomass accumulation  and  yields  (Soltani  and  Sinclair,  2012).  Second,  
sowing dates   constrain   choices   in   cropping   intensity   or   crop   variety.   For 
example,  farmers  who  practice  rainfed  double  cropping  may  prefer  to sow as early  as 
possible  in the wet season (Pires ct a1., 2016).  Delays in the sowing could render double 
cropping impossible, effectively halving the region's agricultural productivity (Fu ct a1., 2013; 
Spera et a1., 2020). In Mato Grosso, a drier wet season has been associated with increased soy 
(first  crop)  yields  but  reduced  corn  (second  crop)  yields  (Cohn  et  at., 2016). Cohn  et 
al. (2016) attribute this to a switch from double cropped systems  in  which  a  short-cycle,  
lower-yield  soy  variety  is  planted  in combination   with  corn,   to  single  cropped   
systems   using   long-cycle, higher-yield  soy  varieties.  Higher  temperatures  can  also  
impact  crop- ping  intensity  in  Mato  Grosso:  a  temperature  anomaly  of  +1  °C  was 
associated with a decline in cropping  intensity (3.2% overall production loss) (Cohn et al., 
2016).
In  addition  to  cropping  choices,  sowing  dates  in  Mato  Grosso  are subject  to a range of 
climatic,  legal, and socio-economic constraints     all of  which  can  interact  to  produce  
spatially  complex  variations  in  when and  where  sowing  occurs.  The  onset  of  the  wet  
season  is  important because  soy  in  Mato  Grosso  is  predominantly   rainfed  (Abrahao  and 
Costa, 2018; Pires et al., 2016). Farmers are also legally constrained from
I-leliyon  7  (2021)  e07436

sowing  in a period close  to  the wet  season  onset  (June  15 - September 15/30)  by  a  
prescribed  sanitary  period  imposed  to  prevent  pathogen outbreaks  (Pires  et  al.,  2016).  
Farmers  are  also  subject  to  a  host  of socio-economic constraints  that lead to dynamic 
sowing behavior (Waha et aI.,  2012).  Variations  in sowing  dates can occur over spatial scales 
as small as individual fields and reflect diverse factors such as risk aversion, access  to  
equipment  and  labor,  use  of  irrigation,  desired  cropping  in- tensity, and soil type (Bcguc 
ct al., 2010; Bussmann ct a1., 2016; Doumas et  aI.,  2003;  Feola  et  al.,  2015;  Kala,  2015;  
Pires  et  al.,  2016),  while interannual  variations reflect volatility in climate, crop price, 
equipment availability,  or technological  development  (lizumi et al., 2019; Kucharik, 2006; 
Kucharik  and Serbin, 2008; Ma et at., 2012). Interactions between climatic and socio-economic 
factors may also occur: Mato Grosso's lack of insurance  and  weak  governance  may  make  cropping 
 and  sowing  de- cisions  more  responsive  to  climate  anomalies  than  regions  with  more 
codified  agricultural  practices  (Cohn  et  al.,  2016).  The  spatially  and inter-annually  
variable  sowing  dates  could  translate  into  large  fluctua- tions in yield.  It is unclear at 
present  which of these  climatic,  legal, and socio-economic  constraints  dominate  contemporary  
 sowing  decisions, and whether any will impose hard limits on adaptation of sowing dates in 
response  to climate change.
In the absence of either highly resolved datasets documenting sowing date,  or  a  reasonable  
model  to  predict  sowing  data,  agricultural  pre- dictions  in Mato Grosso (and elsewhere)  are 
forced  to rely  on untested assumptions   about   the   timing   of   sowing.   For   example,   
many   crop modeling  studies  assume  that  sowing  occurs  on  the  yield-maximizing date  or  at 
 wet  season  onset  (Grassini  et  a1.,  2015;  lizumi  et  al.,  2019; Sacks et  at.,  2010;  
Waha  et  al., 2012).  In South  America,  long  growing seasons  and  intensive  cropping  
practices  mean  that  such  assumptions could result in errors in sowing date as great as five 
months (Waha et at., 2012).  Similarly,  farmers  who  wish  to double  crop are  sometimes  pre- 
sumed  to  plant  immediately   after  the  sanitary  break  to  increase  the likelihood  of  a  
successful  second  crop,  but  it  is  unclear  whether  the sanitary  break  truly imposes  a 
hard limit on sowing (Pires  et at.,  2016). This gap in knowledge  could be addressed  with 
high-resolution sowing data  that  illuminates  the  limits  of  local  adaptability,  allowing  
targeted vulnerability  assessments  and policy evaluation.
Unfortunately,  the  high  cost  of  ground  surveys  means  sowing  and harvest  dates  are  not  
known  at  sufficient  spatiotemporal  resolution  to isolate climatic and socio-economic controls 
on sowing behavior in Mato Grosso.  The highest quality sowing data available over Mato Grosso is a 
weekly crop progress report produced by the Instituto Mato-Grossense de Economia Agropecuaria 
(IMEA) (IMEA, 2019), which reports the percent of  soy  planted  over  7-day  intervals.   These  
reports  are  not  spatially explicit  and  aggregate  across  important  regional  differences  
within  the state (Picoli  et a1., 2018).
In  other  regions  where  sowing  data  are  unavailable,  time  series analysis  of  remotely   
sensed   vegetation   indices   have  been  used   to extract  phenological  dates  of natural  
vegetation  and  crops (Boschetti et   al.,   2009;   Bolton   et   al.,   2020;   Gao  et   at.,   
2020;   Jonsson   and Edklundh,  2004; Sakamoto  et at. , 2005; Zhang et at., 2003,  2020).  By 
calibrating      and     validating      the     phenological      stages     against ground-truth  
sowing  and  harvest  dates,  satellite-observed  vegetation indices  can  be  related  to  
ground-level   behavior.  These  approaches have  been  applied  to  agricultural  production  in  
the  US,  Europe  and Asia:  in  the  midwest  US,  500  m  sowing  dates  for  maize,  wheat  and 
soybean  achieved  root  mean  squared  errors  (RMSE)  of  less  than  10 days compared  to 
state-level Crop Progress Reports (Ren  et at.,  2017; Urban et a1., 2018); in Italy, 250 m rice 
planting and harvest dates have been estimated  with error of 10 days (Boschetti  et al., 2009); in 
Japan, 1  km  planting  and  harvest  dates  were  estimated  with  RMSE  of  12.1 days and 10.6 
days,  respectively  (Sa1‹amoto  et at.,  2005);  and pheno- logical information extracted  for 
wheat at 1 km scale in Punjab, India and  for  wheat  and  corn  at  30  m  in  central  China  
were  both  highly correlated  to validation  data  collected  at  an aggregated  scale (Lobell et 
al., 2013; Pan et  al., 2015).

2

M. Zhang ct a£

However,   existing   satellite-based  approaches   cannot   be   directly applied  to Mato Grosso: 
 the state's variety of cropping  practices require an estimation method that avoids 
region-specific assumptions about crop timing (Zallcs ct a1., 2019) and or that rely on local 
expert knowledge of agricultural practice (Begue et al., 2018). An absence of spatially explicit 
ground    truth    data    requires    the    construction    of    proxies    from high-resolution 
 satellite  data  against  which  to  test  planting  date  esti- mation  algorithms.  Here,  we  
propose  an  approach  to  address  both  of these issues, creating 500 m and 25 km sowing and 
harvest maps of soy, commonly the first of two crops planted within a growing season, across Mato 
Grosso for 2004 to 2014.
The resulting spatial maps of sowing date contain rich information about individual farmers'  
behavior within their climatological, logistical, and eco- nomic  contexts  -  knowledge  that  
will  allow  analysis  of  how  yields  were influenced  by sowing timing, and extrapolation to 
farmer behavior and pro- ductivity  under future scenarios.  A preliminary  analysis of the sowing 
date information is presented here, and identifies important spatial and temporal variability, 
trends, and constraints on sowing date, which can be immediately used to refine assumptions about 
soy agriculture in Mato Grosso.

2.   Methods

2.1.  Stud y site

Mato Grosso is a 900,000 km² state located in the southern Brazilian Amazon  comprising   three  
major  biomes:  Pantanal  (tropical  wetland, 62,000 km²) in the south, Amazon (humid tropical 
forests, 481,000 km²) in the north and Cerrado (tropical savannas,  360,000 km²) in the center 
(Brown  et al., 2013).  The state experiences  a hot, semi-humid  to humid climate,  with  nearly  
constant  and  spatially  homogeneous  temperatures (22-26 °C) year round,  and a strong 
north-south  gradient in rainfall.  At the north  of  the state,  annual precipitation  exceeds 
2000 mm,  with  a 3 month  dry  season;  in  the  south,  annual  rainfall  is  1000  mm  with  a  
5 month (May—October)  dry season (Arvor  et a1., 2014).
Long rainy seasons and continued improvements  in crop variety have contributed   to   rapid   
expansion   of   cultivated   land   in   Mato   Grosso (Abrahao and Costa,  2018).  In 2014,  the 
total row crop area was nearly 100,000 km² (Zalles et at., 2019), of which 850Zowas double cropped 
soy and 12% was single cropped soy, and agriculture  comprised  72% of the state's gross domestic 
product  (GDP) (Cohn  et al., 2016) (Figure 1).

2.2.   Approach

2.2. 1.   Proposed  estimotion  method
While  many  remote  sensing-based  estimates  of  crop phenology  exist, including  in Brazil 
(Becher  et al., 2020),  they must be adjusted  for use in
Hemgon 7’ (2021)  e07436

Mato  Grosso.  First,  the simplifying  assumptions  used  in previous  studies, including  
relatively  rigid  assumptions  about  crop  phenology  and  timing, are not defensible  on 
regional scales,  particularly  where multiple cropping intensities co-occur (Zallcs ct al., 2019). 
Second, ground data availability is a major constraint  in Mato Grosso, creating difficulties for 
calibration  and validation  of remote sensing  estimates.  Without  innovation  in generating 
ground-truth datasets, spatially resolved satellite-based sowing and harvest dates  can  only  be  
validated  using  aggregated  data  such  as  IMEA  crop progress reports. To address these 
challenges, we used a scalable time series analysis  method,  adapted  from  a  linearized  
harmonic  time  series  fitting algorithm introduced by Clinton (2017), to extract phenological 
milestones from EVI derived from MODIS  imagery.  Requiring only linear regression, this algorithm 
was able to take advantage  of Google Earth Engine (GEE)'s automatic  parallelization and  readily  
available  satellite  imagery.  Clinton (2017)'s  linearized  harmonic  time  series  fitting  
method,  designed  to  fit periodic  and  stationary  natural  vegetation  phenology,  was  
expanded  to account  for  non-periodic  agricultural  time  series  in  which  single,  double and 
 triple  cropping  can  occur  in  succession,  and  in  which  the  growing season  may  shift  
rapidly  from  year  to  year.  The  algorithm  provided  a scalable,  rapid analysis  that 
maintained accuracy  and minimized  assump- tions regarding crop timing. The phenological 
milestones derived from this algorithm  were  related  to  reference   ground  sowing  and  harvest 
 dates observed  from high-resolution (3-5 m) Planet Labs imagery,  producing  a calibrated    
relationship    between    sowing/harvest   and   MODIS-derived phenological  dates (Planet,  
2017).  We show  that high-resolution imagery can provide  validation data where survey information 
 is unavailable.

2.3.   Dotasets  and  de  nitrous

A  range  of  remotely-sensed  imagery,  existing  maps,  ground-based datasets   and   climate   
products   were   used   in   the   analysis.   Remote sensing   imagery   consisted   of   the  
Enhanced   Vegetation   Index  (EVI) calculated    from    cloud-masked    MODIS    8-day    
composite    products (MYD09A1   and  MOD09A1)  at  500  m  resolution  from  2004  to  2014 (NASA  
Goddard  Space  Flight  Center,  2019a,b).  High resolution  optical images of soy fields in Mato 
Grosso were obtained from the PlanetScope (3 m) and RapidEye (5 m) satellites from August 1, 2016 
to July 31, 2017
at three locations: 11 images of 32 km² at (-55.389, -11.868); 11 images
of 55 km² at (-53.454,  -15.396);  and 16 images of 126 km² at (-57.731,
-13.285) (Planet, 2017). The images from PlanetScope  and RapidEye are referred  to as “Planet Labs 
imagery”.
We produced a crop cover map identifying areas of single and double cropped soy. A center pivot 
irrigation map for 2014 collected  by Brazil's National   Water   Agency   (ANA)  (Brito,   2017)  
allowed   us  to  identify rainfed fields for analysis. This irrigation map limited the study 
period to 2014  and before,  but is the best data available  in Mato Grosso.












(2014)


Figure 1.  (a) Mato Grosso, Brazil and (b) its crop cover

3

I-Heliyon  7  (2021)  e07436


Wet season onset from 2004 to 2014 was calculated  by Abrahao  and Costa (2018). The anomalous 
accumulation  (AA) method was applied to a  gridded  (0.25   x  0.25  deg)  daily  rainfall  
product  produced  through interpolation of 3625 rain gauges and 735 weather stations across Brazil 
(Liebniann  et  al.,  2007;  Xavier  et  al.,  2016).  In  the  anomalous  accumu- lation (AA) 
method,  the wet season onset date was defined  based on the value of  the anomalous  accumulation  
[mm/day]:

(1)


where R(n) is the rainfall  on day n and Rrefis a reference  rainfall  value, defined  here  as  
the  agronomically  significant  threshold  of  2.5 mm/day (Arvor  ct  al.,  2014).  Here,  t =  1  
refers  to  July  1,  a date  within  the dry season. The onset date was defined as the day at 
which the value of AA(r) reaches  its minimum (Liebmann  et  at.,  2007).
Spatially  aggregated  validation  was  performed  by  comparing  esti- mated   sowing   dates   to 
 (1)  the  University   of  Madison  -  Wisconsin's


Step 1a. Calculate EVI from MODIS
Sustainability and  the Global  Environment  (SAGE) dataset,  which com- piles  national  and  
subnational  planting  and harvest  date  statistics  circa 2000  (Sacks  et  al.,  2010),  and  
(2)  weekly  crop  progress  reports  from IMEA (IMEA,  2019).
For time series  analysis,  we started  the agricultural  year on August  1, the middle of the dry 
season. To relate the calendar year to the agricultural year,  we refer  to “sowing  year”  and  
“harvest  year”.  For example,  for  the agricultural  year commencing  August  1,  2013,  the  
sowing  year  is 2013, and the harvest  year is 2014. Because soy in Mato Grosso can be single or 
double  cropped,  we  refer  separately  to  “single  cropped  (SC)  soy”  and “double cropped (DC) 
soy”, using  “soy” to denote both SC and DC soy.

2.4.   Estimation  of  sowing  rind  horvest dates

A  four-step  process  was  used  to  map  sowing  and  harvest  dates  for Mato Grosso, and is 
illustrated in Figure 2. First, phenological milestones were  estimated  from  MODIS-derived  
Enhanced  Vegetation  Index  (EVI) (Step  1).   Next,   an  equation   relating   the   
phenological   milestones   to







Step 2a. Generate reference ground data with Planet imagery


















Crop calendar error at pixel scgle
Step 3b. Quality control                                   1
]
Eliminate pixels with unreasonable
phenological parameters

Crop cover map er[or




Step 4. Regional crop calendar





Planling date                      Harvest daie

-    -     -X     Crop calendar error at regional scale

Figure  2.   Method  overview.  Each  labelled  step  is described  in  the  text.


4

M.  zhang ct o£

sowing  and  harvest  dates  was  calibrated  to  create  500  m  sowing  and harvest maps (Step 
2). In this step, reference ground data for sowing and harvest  dates  were  also  generated  from  
Planet  Labs  imagery.  Quality control and crop cover maps were applied as masks (Step 3), and a 
25 km regional sowing and harvest date map was created (Step 4). Uncertainty in the resulting  
sowing and harvest  dates at the 500 m and 25 km scale were  quantified  during  Step  4.  Each  
step  is  described  in  detail  in  the following sections.

2.4.1.   Step  1: Extract phenological  milestones com    MODIS  imagery
Soybean   phenology   was   tracked   with   cloud-filtered   enhanced vegetation   index   (EVI)   
from   MODIS   (MOD09A1    and   MYD09A1) (Reed   et   at.,   2009;   Zhang   et   at.,   2003)  
(Step   la,    Figure   2).   The removal   of   the   cloudy   pixels   by  retaining   only   
pixels   labeled   as “clear”  in  the  “StateQA”  band  produced  EVI  time  series  containing 
idiosyncratic  and  irregular  gaps,  impacting  both  EVI (Figure  3a)  and its  time  derivative, 
  dEVI/dt  (Figuie  3f,  computed   with  a  forward difference  method).
The  resulting   gap-containing  EVI  and  dEVI/dr   time  series  were smoothed   with   a   
series   of   moving   average   windows   (Step   lb, Figure  2).  The  size  and  number  of  
smoothing  windows  were  chosen based on three criteria: (i) the percent of soy area for which 
reasonable sowing  and  harvest  date  estimates  were  obtained  (as defined  in Step 3); (ii) 
accuracy  of sowing and harvest  date estimates (as obtained  by comparison  to  data  described  
in  Step  2);  and  (iii) robustness  of  esti- mates to the number of missing points in the EVI 
time series (addressed by   degrading   complete,   cloud-filtered   EVI   time   series:   
randomly eliminating  1  to 10 of the roughly 25 EVI points covering  the growing window  of  the  
first  crop).  The  best  of  the  trialed  methods  was  incor- porated  in  the  main  algorithm. 
 This  involved  smoothing  each pixel's annual  time  series  with  two  successive  20-day  
moving  average  win- dows (Figure  3b),  and smoothing  dEVI/dt  once  with a 40-day moving 
average window (Figure 3f). While these windows are large compared to  the  roughly  120-day  
growing  cycle  of  soy,  they  were  necessary  to eliminate  high noise caused by cloud gaps and 
aerosols.  The width of these windows is acceptable because the method aims to describe only broad 
features of the time series, such as the date of the peak and width of   the   soy   curve,   which 
  are   not   degraded   under   the   smoothing windows.
Next,  phenological  features  were  retrieved  from  the  smoothed  EVI time series using the 
proposed  fitting algorithm (Step lb,  Figure 2). The
“greenup” date for the first crop,      {,p, was defined as the date of fastest increase in EVI. 
The “peak" day for first crop was similarly defined as the date of maximum EVI,         „p.   Peak 
and greenup dates are often used to
estimate  sowing  and  harvest  dates  in  the  literature  (Sakamoto  ct  at., 2005),  and their 
high signal-to-noise ratio makes  them relatively  robust to data gaps (Hmimina  et at.,  2013; Pan 
et al., 2015).




0 a


in   '  '

0 z

be               Nov             Jan            ! far            lv4ay              Jul
I-feltgon 7 (2021)  e0Z436

We  fitted  the  smoothed  EVI  time  series  to  a  1st  order  harmonic function  following  
Clinton  (2017),  which  is  similar  to other  functional forms  used  extensively   in  
phenological   studies  (e.g.  Geerken,   2009; Wagcnscil  and Samimi,  2016):


The  terms  J     and  J,    represent  the  mean  EVI  and  the  linear  trend, respectively.  The 
phase, /.  and amplitude, A,  terms can be calculated by linear regression  of EVI on time if 
frequency m is known (Shurnway  and
Stoffer,   2017).   The   remaining   parameters   can   be   found   by   linear regression.  We 
estimated m using the “quarter  period”,  q, defined as the time  difference  between  the         
„q   and  the  preceding   *  {,g,  where  m and q were then related  as q  — c/2m.
As  shown  in  Table  1,  the  peak  and  greenup  date,s  (@          ,  J}„¿) were identified by 
searching for maximum EVI or maximum |dEVI/dt| in two time windows (see Figure 3 c, i).
We avoided computing dates in the middle of the wet season due to high
levels of cloud cover. Therefore,  the quarter period, q, for the first crop was estimated  as      
                         (Figure 3, c and h). Because this q was calcu- lated for the first crop, 
the harmonic function was fitted only over the time window  corresponding  to the first crop (from  
          —   2q to         qp      q,
see Figure 3e). These windows maximized the number of EVI points avail- able for fitting but avoid 
associating EVI observations with the wrong crop. With in for each crop cycle estimated from q, Ed. 
(2) was fitted to the  EVI time series for each crop cycle, and A and     obtained from the fitted 
values. The phase was then used to calculate the “analytic” peak date for
the first crop as         /„      —  ₂*p. The analytic peak  date is an estimate  of peak  
greenness  that  is  more  robust  to  noise  and  data  gaps  than  its numeric  counterpart.  We 
did not calculate  an analytic greenup date.
During  this  step,  the  algorithm  was  applied  to  all  pixels  in  Mato
Grosso.  Because the crop cover classification required  the results of  this algorithm,  we were 
not able to mask  soy pixels until after  this step was completed. Fortunately, knowledge of 
whether a pixel is single or double cropped  was  not  required  to  fit  the  algorithm.   A  
sensitivity  analysis showed  that  estimates  of  the  first  crop  date  were  independent  of  
the presence  or  absence  of  a  second  crop,  so  the  same  methods  could  be applied  to  
single  and  double  cropped  pixels.  Because  crop  cover  data were  not  available  to  
identify  the  second  crop,  we  did  not  estimate sowing and harvest  dates for the second crop.
The impact of crop management practices on our algorithm were also considered.   Fertilization   
has  been  shown   to  cause  a  higher   rate  of phenology  change  (Thies  et  a1.,  1995)  and  
higher  yield  in  soy  crop, potentially  having  a  larger  impact  on  crop  development   than  
climate change (Liu  and  Dai,  2020).  Fertilization's impact  on crop development may be manifest 
 in the time series of EVI as a shorter growing  period or



(e) Fitting window


nod
) W              f
peak

Figure  3.   Time  series  analysis  method.

5

M. Zhang ct a£


Table 1. The date windows over which phenological stages were sought.
Hemgon 7’ (2021)  e07436

manually  delineated  into fields  based  on the presence of clearly visible roads. These images 
were taken by the PlanetScope  (3 m) and RapidEye

Description
Peak date of the first crop


Greenup for first crop
Symbol                       Date Window
August 1 of the
sowing  year  to March 31 of the harvest  year
August 1 of the sowing year
(5 m) satellites, and offered enough spatial resolution to clearly delineate soy fields, observe 
greenup soon after sowing, and follow the progress of harvest  equipment  as  bright,  bare  
patches  gradually  replace  mature, brown fields at the end of the growing season.
We downloaded Planet Labs images over locations that (1) cover only soy fields (based on crop cover 
point data) and (2) are representative of all the potential sources of error in the estimation 
method. To ensure that

higher  peak. These  shifts in crop timing and  peak greenness  are inher- ently captured  in our 
time series analysis  method  because we make  no assumptions about growing period or peak EVI 
value. Furthermore, as we ignore the last quarter of the crop cycle during fitting due to cloud 
cover, our  method  is  robust  to any  potential  acceleration  of  crop  maturation that could 
cause the phenological curve to become asymmetric.

2.4.2.  Step 2: Colibrote a relationsh!p between  phenologicol  porameters rind bowing/hnrvesr 
reference  ground  dnrn genernred  from Plonet LobS  imagery
The peak and greenup dates (       „q,       {,p) derived from EVI time series  were  used  to  
estimate  the  sowing  and  harvest  dates  through equations calibrated  to “ground-truth” data:
the  image  locations  contain  soy,  we  chose  combinations  of  fields  and years that were 
reported as soy in the land cover data. In the interest of obtaining Planet Labs images that are 
representative of all potential error sources,  we  included  both  single  and  double  cropped  
fields  and  chose images  that  were  spatially  far  apart.  A  large,  persistent  storm  system 
would  generate  the  same  gap  in  the  vegetation  index  timeseries  over adjacent  fields,  
potentially  missing  a  significant  source  of  error  that would  have  appeared  if  the  
storms  occurred  in  a  different  pattern. Additionally,  using images scattered over Mato Grosso 
ensured that the calibration  was not biased toward a single producer or toward  practices that are 
local to a specific  region. Figure  4 shows the locations  in Mato Grosso for which  we downloaded 
 images  that span  the whole  growing season. We uploaded  these Planet  Labs images to Google  
Earth Engine,
delineated individual fields by hand, and recorded the earliest and latest

Sowing date =  @{{y„, — p•q

Harvest  date =          „,      h"q
(3)

(4J
possible sowing and harvest dates for each field. Figure 5 displays some Planet Labs imagery 
samples, highlighting sowing and harvest detection and the influence of clouds on data creation.
Farming  cycles  were identified  for  each  field  using  observations  of

Where p and h represent  the number of quarter periods, q, between the fitted peak date,     ’¿gq 
q, and the sowing and harvest dates, respectively.
Because ground survey data do not exist in Mato Grosso, we visually interpreted  high-resolution 
Planet  Labs imagery  to identify sowing and harvest activity over soy fields in Mato Grosso. We 
refer to the dataset of sowing  and  harvest  dates  created  from  Planet  Labs  imagery  as  the 
“reference  ground dataset” (Step 2a, Figure  2).
To  create  the  reference  ground  dataset,  we  first  identified  three distinct  soy  regions  
from  crop  cover  training  data  (Figure  4).  Each studied  area contained  40—80  soybean  
fields.  The  Planet  Labs  imagery obtained over these locations from l  August 2016 to 31 July 
2017 were








Mato Grosso
10 'S

2•        .MATOPIBA
surveyed
bare  soil,  green  vegetation,  brown  mature  crops,  and  bare  soil.  This allowed estimation 
of harvest dates (illustrated in Figure 5) based on the distinct  geometric  patterns  caused  by  
harvesting  equipment.  Sowing dates  were  reported  by visual  assessment  over  a  2—5  week  
date  range (depending  on the quality  and  temporal  resolution  of  the dataset)  pre- ceding 
the first observed increase in greenness in the soy fields. The final reference  ground  dataset  
consisted  of  the  earliest  and  latest  possible sowing and  harvest  dates for the date  range 
1  August  2016  to 31 July 2017. This dataset  was used  to evaluate  the pixel-level  accuracy  
of  the estimation method over fields which are known to be soy, in the absence of additional error 
introduced by the land cover map at the regional level. We applied the proposed  time series 
analysis method to the Planet Labs locations over the same date range in order to calculate 
estimation error; however, we were unable to generate sowing and harvest date estimates for all 
rainfed soy in Mato Grosso  after  2014 due to lack of  recent irri- gation maps.
Our reference ground data was compared to a ground survey of 90 soy properties from 2010 to 2017, 
which reported sowing and harvest dates over the MATOPIBA region of Northeast Brazil (comprising 
the states of Maranhao,  Tocantins,  Piaui  and  Bahia)  (Figure  4). While  this  “MATO- PIBA 
survey” was the best property level ground truth data available to us in Brazil, it may have been 
affected by recall bias as it was conducted only during  the  8th  year.  Therefore,  we  
introduced  large  error  bars  to  the original  data  if  responders  reported  vague  date  
ranges  for  sowing  and harvest  (such  as  “early  October”).  The  width  of  these  error  bars 
 was chosen based on the wording of the reported date range; for example, a

20  S



3-0  S
locations
report  of  “2nd  week  of October”  received  a range of  October 10  +/-  7 days; “early October” 
 received  an error bar of October 10  +/-  15  days; and “October”  received  an error bar of 
October 15  +/-  20 days.
MATOPIBA  survey  data  and  Planet  Labs  imagery  collections  coin- cided for two properties, 
enabling a direct comparison  between the two datasets. Existing survey data in MATOPIBA were found 
to be inadequate for ground-truthing soy in Brazil due to excessive spatial aggregation and 
concerns about farmers'  recall bias. In the survey, a single set of sowing and harvest dates were 
reported for each property (on average, 52 km²).

Figure 4.  The location of MATOPIBA ground-truth survey and of Mato Grosso's Planet Labs image 
locations                1, 2 and 3).
However,  significant  differences  (up  to  3  months)  in  the  sowing  and harvest dates across 
fields within each property were visually evident in the  Plant  Labs  imagery.  One  property  
reported  that  their  sowing  and harvest activity occurred over a period of 1 and 1.5 months, 
respectively.

6

Ivl.  zhang ct o£                                                                                   
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
   I-feltgon 7 (2021)  e07436

Location  1  on  June 2, 2017                        Location 1 on Oct 31, 2016













Location 2 on Sept 12, 2016       Location 2 on March 23, 2017


Bare rainfed field during  dry season,  prior to sowing



Irrigated  fie|d  at peak vegetative stage during dry season

Greenness and detected  by eye even on
cloudy days



Figure S.  Planet Labs images from two locations in Mato Grosso, ranging from the start of the 
growing season (September)  to the end (June) illustrate the visual cues that were  used  to 
estimate  sowing  and  harvest  dates for each  field.  Clouds and cloud  shadows  impacted  the 
quality  of  the estimates.


For  the  same  property,  Planet  Labs  imagery  suggested  that  sowing  was spread over a 2 
month period, and harvest activity over a 3 month period, an increase of 100%. This larger range 
indicated  that at least some fields were  not  covered  by  the  values  reported  in the MATOPIBA 
 survey.  For the  other  overlapping  property,  the  reported  sowing  and  harvest  dates were  
not  consistent  with  greenup  and  browndown  observed  in  Planet Labs  imagery  in  3  out  of  
4  of  its  fields,  with  differences  of  up  to  1.5 months.
Additionally,  5%  of  MATOPIBA  survey  responses  reported  identical
dates  across  all years,  suggesting  that  farmer  recall may  have  impacted the  quality  of  
the  results.  Our  examination  of  two  of  these  properties suggested  that  spatial 
aggregation  could  lead  to large errors  in reported crop timing. Reference ground datasets may 
be a worthwhile alternative, even  where  survey  data  are  available,  because  it  avoids  the  
greater  im- perfections  in some survey  datasets.
Given  the uncertainties  in the  sowing  and harvest  date  information, we computed  the RMSE as 
the difference (in days) between the estimate and the nearest date in the reported date range if 
the estimated date fell outside  of  the range,  or zero  when the estimate  fell inside  the 
range.
The best calibration RMSE of 2.5 and 1.6 days for sowing and harvest date across all three Planet 
Labs imagery sites (Figure 4) was achieved by
setting the sowing date as         /g,   — 1.75q, and harvest as         ¿g,   +  1.lq (Step 2b, 
Figure  2).  Cross-validation,  in which one Planet Labs  imagery site  was  removed   per  
calibration,   estimated  out-of-sample   prediction
RMSE as 2.92 and 1.61 days for sowing  and harvest date. We tested the
sensitivity of the estimated sowing and harvest dates to variations in time series   analysis   
parameters   that   were   settled   by   trial   and   error   by
comparing  each  version  of  the estimated  dates  to  the  reference  ground dataset. The 
parameters  included in the sensitivity  analysis were p and h (Eqs. (3) and (4)), moving  window  
sizes for smoothing (Step 1), and the
window  over which          ppq  was sought (Step 1).
The  parameters  used  in  the  method  were  found  through  sensitivity analysis. In Step 1, we 
used smoothing windows to compensate for cloud- induced   noise  in  the  EVI  timeseries,   and  
calibrated  parameters   that related  two  phenological  indicators,  peak  date  and  quarter  
period,  to sowing and harvest dates. The size of the smoothing  windows and value of the 
calibrated parameters were selected to minimize error as compared to  the  reference  ground  
dataset  obtained  from Planet  Labs  imagery.  As shown   in  Table   2,  of  the  six  parameters 
  chosen   through   sensitivity analysis,  five had a significant  impact  on the estimated  
sowing  date.  As expected,  the “peak cutoff date” had no effect on the estimate for the first 
crop. Here, the peak cutoff date refers to the date after which EVI values were  ignored  for  
first  crop  estimates,  and  the  date  before  which  EVI values were ignored for second crop 
estimates. In other words, EVI values after  the  peak  cutoff  date  (second  crop)  did  not  
make  any  impact  on estimates based on EVI values before the peak cutoff date (first crop). EVI 
observations   after   the  chosen   peak   cutoff   date  of   April  1   were   not considered  
for  estimating   the  sowing/harvest  dates  of  the  first  crop, regardless  of the cropping  
intensity.
Notably,  we  found  that  two smoothing  windows  were  necessary  for EVI.  An overly  wide 
smoothing  window  may merge  two separate  peaks into  one,  falsely  increasing  the  estimated  
quarter  period.  An  increased quarter   period   means   that   the  crop   growing   season   
length   is  over- estimated, which would result in sowing date estimates that are too early,

Table 2. Sensitivity of sowing/harvest estimate error on timeseries algorithm parameters, and the 
error-minimizing parameter values. The estimates were most sensitive to  the sowing  and harvest  
calibration  parameters,  followed  by dEVI/dt's  smoothing  window  size.

Timeseries  analysis parameter                                                             Effect  
on sowing  date error  [days of error per unit change  in
parameter]
Effect  on harvest  date error  [days of error per unit change  in parameters]
Error-minimizing value

Peak cutoff date [days]
First moving  window  for EVI smoothing  [days] Second moving  window  for EVI smoothing  [days] 
Smoothing  window  for dEVI  [days]
Sowing  calibration  parameter  (p) [-] Harvest calibration  parameter
0
0.01
0.02
0.1
21
n/a
0
0.1
0.14
0.1
n/a 13
April 1
20
20
40
1.75
1.1

7

M.  zhang ct o£

and harvest date estimates that are too late. However,  an overly narrow smoothing window would 
distort the location of the peak and greenup in unpredictable  ways:  noise  from  images  impacted 
 by  clouds  or  aerosol would  cause  the estimated  peak  and  greenup date  to be too late or 
too early, causing sowing dates that are either too early (if peak and greenup are  too  close  
together,  or  if  peak  is  too early)  or  too  late  (if  peak  and greenup are too far apart, 
or if peak is too late). The use of two successive smoothing windows balanced the need for 
increased smoothing  without blending  a double cropped  field into a single peak.

2.4.3.   Step  3:  Apply  crop  cover  and  qualiy control mosks
To produce soy sowing and harvest dates over Mato Grosso required knowing  the  location  and 
cropping  intensity  of soy agriculture  across the state (Step 3a, Figure  2).  To map soy 
agriculture  and its intensity, we adapted an existing crop classification technique  tested for 
soy and
I-Heliyon  7  (2021)  e07436

to align input data across years and locations. This alignment produced a classified  that  was 
robust  to interannual  and inter-regional variations  in the sowing  and harvest  dates,  
sensitive  to physiological  and seasonality differences  among  crop types  and crop intensity  
levels,  and relevant  in extrapolated  contexts (Zhong et al.,  2016).
In addition to first crop phenology, whose estimation is detailed in the main text, we also used 
second crop phenology during classification. The method to derive second crop phenology was similar 
to that for the first crop,  with the following  changes  to Step lb:

1.  Instead of extracting  greenup (tg„qg)  from the smoothed EVI times-
eries,  we extracted  the  “browndown”  date,          d,    ,  defined  as the date  of  fastest  
decrease  in  EVI.  The  “quarter  period”,  q,  was  then
defined  as the time difference  between  the       , ,‘,q and          d,    .
2.  The  time  windows  within  which  the  peak  and  browndown  dates

corn in Parana State, Brazil (Zhong et at., 2016). We trained a Cartesian
classifier  in  GEE  using  topographic,  phenological  and  spectral  infor-
,   ($
,          d,    ) were identified by searching for maximum EVI or

mation derived from Landsat and MODIS. All phenological and spectral input  data  in our  study  
were  derived  from  the  EVI  time  series  calcu- lated in Step lb  (cloud-filtered and 
smoothed), while topographic  data (elevation,  slope,  aspect  and hillshade)  were derived  from 
the Shuttle Radar  Topography  Mission  (Farr  et  at.,  2007).  While  we  only  report sowing  
and  harvest  dates  for  the  first  crop  (soy),  phenological  infor- mation   for   the  second 
  crop  was  used   as   input   to  the  crop  cover classifier.
Training data constraints meant that only three land cover types were classified:  single  cropped  
soy,  double cropped  soy,  and non-soy  agricul- ture. After the classified labeled all pixels in 
Mato Grosso as one of these three classes, we masked out non-agricultural lands using the Mapbiomas 
land  cover  dataset.  The  phenological  and  spectral  information  used  to classify  pixels as 
“single cropped soy”,  “double cropped soy”, and “non- soy  agriculture”  is  shown  in  Figure  6. 
 The  Shuttle  Radar  Topography Mission  (SRTM)  provided  topographic  information  on elevation, 
 slope, aspect,  and  hillshade  at  30  m  resolution  that  was  used  in  land  cover 
classification (Farr et a1., 2007). Crop cover training  data (9,000 points, 2003—2017)  was  
formed  by  intersecting  a Landsat-based  crop  classifi- cation produced  by  Agrosatelite  
(2017) with a roadside  survey  of Mato Grosso's  agricultural  areas  conducted  by  Embrapa  and  
the  Kansas  Bio- logical Survey (Kastens  et a1., 2017).  The classes in this training  dataset 
were  “double cropped soy”,  “single  cropped  soy”,  and “non-soy  agricul- ture”,    and    did   
 not    include    points    separating    agriculture    from non-agricultural  cover.  Therefore  
we  supplemented  our  classified  map with  Mapbiomas  v3,  a 30 m  resolution  land  cover  map  
of  Brazil  from 1985  to 2017 that identified  row crop agriculture (Mapbiomas,  2019).
Because  cloud  filtering  of  the  MODIS  data  in  Step  la   introduced spatial gaps in the EVI 
images that, if not filled, would be propagated as gaps in the classifier's  training  data,  the 
EVI images  were gapfilled over space with a mean square kernel. This ensured that each point in 
the land cover dataset contained a full set of input data.
The  classified  was  trained  on  spectral  information  benchmarked  on phenological stages, 
rather than on calendar dates, to allow the classifier
maximum |dEVI/dt|  are listed in Table 3.
3.  We  fitted  the  timeseries  to  the  1st  order  linearized  harmonic  using only EVI values 
corresponding  to the second crop (from  p’   "q'p — q to


Our crop cover map achieved an overall  accuracy  of 82.2 -j-/- 0.5%, calculated via 
cross-validation with the crop cover dataset in which 10% of  points  were  eliminated  per  
calibration.  Consumer's  and  producer's accuracy  are displayed  in Table  4. The 25 km scale 
sowing and harvest date  ranges  reported  for  single  and  double  cropped  soy  in Table  5  ac- 
count  for  this  classification  error,  and  as  discussed  in Section  3.3,  dif- ferences among 
cropping intensities can be discerned despite crop cover classification error.
Next,  we used  a map of center  pivot  irrigation  locations  in 2014  to mask   out   potentially 
  irrigated   pixels  from  2004   to  2014  (Step  3a, Figure 2). Irrigated fields do not conform 
to the assumptions made in the time  series  analysis,  and  correspond  to fundamentally  
different  sowing dates  and adaptation  options  than rainfed fields.  We made  the assump- tion 
that non-irrigated  locations in 2014  were also non-irrigated  in pre- vious  years.  This  was  
justified  because  center  pivot  is  a  permanent structure  that,  once  installed,  will not  
be  dismantled  for  several  years. This means that a field that was rainfed in 2014 is unlikely 
to have been irrigated in past years. In the absence of center pivot data for all years in our  
study  period,  we  created  a  conservative  mask  for  center  pivot  by eliminating  all pixels 
in previous years (2004-2013)  that were irrigated in 2014.
In  a  final  quality  control  step,  we  tested  the  predicted  sowing  and harvest dates 
against a series of rules intended  to screen out implausible results (Step 3b, Figure 2), 
requiring  that:

1.  The peaks of the first and second crop were more than 20 days apart.
2.  Sowing occurred between August 1 of the sowing year and May 31 of the harvest year. This rule 
recognizes that no soy is planted during the height of the dry season.





Phenological input data



0.8

0.6
Sep         Nov         Jan Peak date
and  value
Date
Mar        May          Jul          Sep




Raw EVI Smoothed  EVI

Pheno-spectral      “       4
input data
o z
Greenup

Minimum
Fitted amplitude

Quarter  period

Figure  6.   Input  data  for  the  crop  classification  for  a  sample  pixels  and  year.

8

M.  zhang ct o£


Table 3.  The date  windows  over  which  phenological  stages were sought.

Description                                            Symbol          Date Window
Peak date of the second crop              $econd                      April 1  to July 31 of  the 
harvest year
Browndown  for the second crop         @q                    ip,p ,      until July 31 of the 
harvest  year



Table 4. Crop cover  accuracy  and confusion  matrix.

Single                       Double                     Non soy                 Producer's cropped  
soy            cropped  soy            agriculture            accuracy
Singlecroppedsoy              440                          548                         3            
                44%
Doublecroppedsoy            301                          4367                       53              
            92%
Nonsoyagriculture            9                              128                          107        
                43%
Consumer's  accuracy           59%                        86%                        66%            
          82.5%


Table S.  Sowing and harvest date error at aggregated scales. This combines pixel level  errors  in 
 sowing  and  harvest  date  estimates  and  land  cover  classification errors.  Pixel scale       
       dominate.
I-Heliyon  7  (2021)  e07436

2.4.4.   Step  4:  Create  25  km sowing and  harvest  dates  rind quonti(y estimation  errors
Steps  1  to 3  allowed  us  to produce  500 m sowing  and  harvest  date maps  for  single  and  
double  cropped  soy  from  2004  to  2014.  We  then aggregated  our estimates  to 25 km cells  to 
match  the  scale  of  available wet  season  onset  data and  to  visualize  broader  spatial  
trends.  Our esti- mates  contain  errors  from  two sources:  (l)   pixel-scale  errors  
associated with  time  series  analysis  and  the  calibrated  equation;  and  (2) regional- scale 
(25 km) errors  associated  with  the crop cover  map. Pixel-scale  er- rors  apply  at  field  
scales,  but  when  these  are  aggregated  to  regional scales,  errors  associated  with  the 
crop cover  map must  be included.
Errors  at  the  pixel  level  were  quantified  with  the  reference  ground data  (Figure  7).  
However,  because  the  reference  ground  data  were  re- ported as a range of plausible 
sowingJarvest  dates, the calibration data themselves  contain  uncertainty.  We  used  the  law  
of  total probability  to aggregate  the error and its uncertainty  at individual  pixel scales  
into an error distribution  that describes  all pixels.
We  modeled  the  uncertainty  in pixel-level  error  as  a uniform  distri- bution spanning  from 
the difference between the estimate and the lower bound,  and the difference  between the estimate  
and the upper bound of the  reported  range.  Each  pixel  in  the dataset  contained  its  own 
unique

Total                             Single
error  [days]                 cropped soy
Sowing                         6.9 A 18.7
Harvest                         1.9 +  21.3
Double
cropped soy
6.9 A 17.5
1.8 -L 19.9
All soy
(single +  double cropped)
6.9      17.4
1.8      19.8
pixel-level  errors,  which  were  then  aggregated  into  a single  pixel-level error  
distribution,   p(x),   describing   all  pixels,   using   the  law  of  total probability (Eg. 
(5)). The distributions of the error bounds, n and b, were found  by  fitting  a normal  
distribution  to  n  and  b  values  found  at  indi- vidual  pixels.  E9.  (5)  was  solved  
numerically  in R.  Sowing  and harvest

3.  The crop cycle  of soy (sowing  to  harvest)  was  between  60  and 150 days. The average  soy 
crop cycle is 120  days long, 90 days for short cycle varieties.
4.  A  soy  pixel  must  have  a  raw  peak  EVI  of  at  least  0.8  during  the growing season 
and a fitted EVI amplitude of at  least 0.15. This rule filters out natural vegetation pixels that 
are misclassified  as soy using EVI  properties  of  soy  that  are  established  in  literature.  
Soy  pixels display  a much  higher seasonal change in EVI than forest cover and have a larger peak 
EVI value than savannah, so pixels can be filtered by peak EVI and the amplitude of the fitted EVI 
curve.
error distributions  were  treated separately.





Where
n  =   estimate      upper  bound  of  reported  range b   ——   estimate  — lower  bound  of  
reported  range y   =    b  —  o
If     =    Heaviside  function
p  a)  =   probability  density  distribution  of  o
p     )   =     probability  density  distribution  of b



(5)




Estimate
Location 1
Estimation error
Location  2
Estimate            Estimation error

















40    Sowing date  110             150   Harvest date  230

-25      Error [days]   25

Figure 7.  Estimated  pixel-scale  sowing  and harvest  dates  and pixel-scale  estimation  errors  
for Planet  Labs data locations  (as labeled  in Figure  4). The pixels in these maps  were quality 
 masked as described  in Step 3. Some fields do not contain reported  data because  there           
 not enough Planet Labs images to construct  a range of possible  sowing/harvest dates  less  than  
1.5 months  long.  The errors  shown  in  this  figure  are defined  following  Section  2.4.2.

9


At  regional  scale,   our  estimates   also  contain   errors  due  to  mis- classified  soy  
cover.  Because  the  sowing  and  harvest  date  estimation

3.   Results
I-Heliyon  7  (2021)  e07436

method  was  independent  of land cover  classification,  the misclassifica- tion in land cover 
contributed to sowing and harvest date as a mislabeling of  pixels  when  aggregating.  For  
example,  the  sowing  date  of  double cropped soy within a 25 km region has uncertainties 
associated with both the  sowing  date  error  at  individual  pixels  and  the  misclassification 
of double cropped  soy in the region.
We  simulated  the  error  introduced  by  misclassification  through  boot- strapping.  We 
generated  a “true” land cover map for a 25 km region con- taining  the average  proportion of 
single cropped,  double cropped soy and non-soy  agriculture  found in Mato Grosso.  From this,  we 
generated  many “erroneous”  land cover maps in agreement  with the confusion maoix. For each  
erroneous  land  cover  map,  we  calculated  the  median  sowing  and harvest dates for single 
cropped soy, double cropped soy, and all soy pixels. The difference between this median and the 
corresponding  median for the “true” land cover map represented  the error inooduced  to the 
aggregated sowing and harvest dates by erroneous  land cover classification. The total error  at  
the  25 km aggregated  scale  was  a simple  sum  of  the pixel  level estimate  error and  the 
error introduced  by the land cover classification.


Sowing date

Single crop                        Double crop
3.1.  Spatiol  potters end vorintion  in sowing end hnrves£ dates

Figure 7 shows quality-controlled estimates of the sowing and harvest dates  for  two  Planet  Labs 
 imagery  locations  in  Mato  Grosso.  At  pixel scale,  the data reveal large  differences  in 
the timing of  soy agriculture across adjacent fields, showing that neighboring fields of 1—2 km in 
size can  differ  in their sowing dates  by more  than one  month,  and  in  their harvest dates by 
more than two months.
Figure 8 shows median sowing and harvest dates over 25 km cells for single and double cropped soy 
for selected years between 2004 and 2014. The maps display interannual  and regional  variation in 
the sowing and harvest dates.
The  long-term  spatial  pattern  of  sowing  and  onset  dates,  averaged over  2004 to 2014, is 
shown in Figure  9. For both cropping  intensities, central  Mato  Grosso  is  planted  earlier,  
while  areas  closer  to  the  state border are planted later. As we explore in greater depth in a 
subsequent paper, Zhang et a1. (2021), onset likely plays a large role in determining these the 
regional differences  in sowing dates, as the spatial  patterns in sowing roughly follow patterns 
of onset. However, onset cannot explain

Harvest date

Double crop

8"S


2004










2007









201
1








2014

18  S











14  S


1 G - S


18° S























S


2*S


S

Harvest date
[days after Aug 1]
150 - 175
175 - 190
190 - 205
205 - 220
220   235
235 - 250

Sowing
date [days after Aug 1]
50 - 75
75 - 90
90 - 105
@    105— 120
120 - 135
135 - 150




Figure 8.  Estimated  median sowing and harvest dates,

10

M. Zhang ct a£

all of the regional variability:  time-averaged  onset is more spatially ho- mogeneous  than  
time-averaged  sowing  dates. The difference  in spatial pattern of sowing dates (and of sowing 
dates after the influence of onset is removed, Figure 11) between the two cropping intensities also 
hints at non-climatic controls on sowing decisions. Single-cropped soy appears to have a stronger 
spatial pattern in sowing dates than double cropped soy, though they experience the same onset. 
Single cropped soy is both more spatially  autocorrelated  and  more  variable  than  double  
cropped  soy: Moran's I is 0.577 and 0.537 for single and double cropped soy, respec- tively, and 
standard deviation is 8.24 and 7.77 days. Additionally, in the central part of Mato Grosso, single 
and double cropped soy are planted at very similar times, but sowing dates diverge at the edges of 
the state.

3.2.  in£ernnntinf  trends  rind constraints  in sowing dotes

3.2.1.  Snnitnry break is not n hard  limit for early  sowing,  btit wet season onset may be 
in$uentiol
Figure 10a shows histograms  of sowing and harvest  dates for single and double cropped  soy from  
2004 to 2014, overlaid  on Mato Grosso's median wet season onset for the corresponding year in 
blue; Figure 10b shows  the delay  between  sowing  date and  onset  for single  and double cropped 
 soy  from  2004  to  2014.  These  data  reveal  that  the  delay consistently  (with  the 
exception of  2010) decreased from 2004 to 2014 for  both  single  and  double  cropped  soy.  
During  2010,  there  was  an anomalously early onset of the wet season, but sowing dates did not 
shift to a correspondingly early time. By 2014, the delay for both double and single  cropped  soy  
were  both  at  an  all-time  low  of  19  and  30  days, respectively.
For  most soy agriculture  in  Mato Grosso,  sowing  dates occur  much later  than either  the wet 
season onset  or  the sanitary  break,  indicating that neither of these constraints  is a hard 
limit on early sowing. Our re- sults indicate that the mean sowing date for double cropped fields 
is 89 days after August 1 (late October), while the mean sowing date for single

bowing date (2004 — 2014 average)
Hemgon 7’ (2021)  e07436

cropped fields is 98 days after August 1  (early November)  (Figure 10a). Thus,  the average  
sowing  date for double cropped  soy is over a month after the end of the sanitary break. 
Similarly, Figure  4 0a reveals a delay between  sowing  and  wet  season  onset  of  at  least 19 
days,  up  to three months  for  late-planted  single  cropped  soy,  and  up  to two  months  for 
late-planted  double cropped soy. This delay in sowing may indicate that the  onset  date  used  
here  is  estimated  too  early.  However,  the  onset definition  used  here  produces  mean  
yearly  onset  estimates  close  to alternative  onset  definitions.  The  anomalous  accumulation  
definition produces  onset  estimates  no  more  than  2  days  later  than  a  definition based  
on frequency of rainy days within a 4-week  period,  and no more than 5 days later than a 
definition  based on accumulated  depth of  pre- cipitation over a 50-day period. The anomalous 
accumulation definition more often produces onset estimates that are earlier than the other defi- 
nitions. An alternative explanation may stem from the large size of farms: properties of 10,000 ha 
may require  up to 4 weeks to complete sowing (Pires  et  a1.,  2016).  Therefore,  observed  
sowing  dates  may  not  reflect intended sowing dates, especially for larger properties.
Additionally,  it  is  clear  that  the  onset  and  sanitary  break  do  have impact on crop 
timing: sowing dates almost never occur before these two constraints  (Figure  10a).  Among  the  
two  limits,  the  wet  season  onset appears  to  exert  the  more  consistent  pull  on  
behavior.  Except  for  the anomalously early-onset year of 2010, onset occurred after the end of 
the sanitary  break,  suggesting  that  the  sanitary  break  is rarely  relevant  in driving 
sowing behavior compared to onset (Figure 10a). Additionally, as sowing  dates  moved  closer  to  
the  onset,  the  probability  density  distri- bution of sowing dates became more concentrated. 
This “piling up” effect is most obvious in 2014 and suggests that farmers collectively pay closer 
attention to onset as they attempt to plant earlier each year (Figure 10b).
3.2.2.  Double cropped  soy is planted earlier  than st  gIe cropped  soy
Double  cropped  soy  was  consistently   planted  earlier  than  single cropped soy, although this 
gap shrank over time - the difference between


Onset date (2004 — 2014 average)












Sowing date               Onset date
|days after Aug 1]     [days after Aug 1]
120

110
100
90
80
70
-  60

50

40



Figure 9.  Estimated mean sowing and onset dates, averaged from 2004 to 2014, in days after August 
1 of the sowing year. The areas shown represent only soy planted
in all years  of  the study  period.

M.  zhang et a£
I-Heliyon  7 (2021)  e07436













0                         0u                       i zu                      z ur'
DOY from Aug 1
Double cropped soy




-z   u
Days

50








DOY from Aug 1
Median wet season onset Median sowing or harvest date Sanitary break (Sept 15)
Figure 10.  (a) Histogram  of estimated  sowing  and harvest  dates for single  and double cropped  
soy  across Mato Grosso front  2004  to 2014.  The median  wet season onset across the state is 
shown in red vertical lines, median sowing and harvest dates in block vertical lines, and the 
sanitary  break in a gray vertical line.       The delay between  sowing  and  onset  dates  across 
Mato  Grosso.  Positive  value  indicates  that  sowing  occurs  after onset.  A  delay  of  zero  
is  drawn  in the  blue  vertical  line.



median  sowing  date  for  double  and  single  cropped  soy  across  Mato Grosso decreased  from 
24 days in 2004  to 10 days in 2014 (Figure 10). This is mostly associated with earlier sowing of 
single cropped soy, rather than  later  sowing  of  double  cropped  soy.  The  stronger  trend  
for  single cropped  soy  could  indicate  farmers  sowing  early  to  allow  for  double cropping  
but making  a subsequent  decision  not  to plant  a second  crop. Double  cropped  soy  sowing  
dates  also  appear  more  sensitive  to  wet season  onset  than  single  cropped  soy.  For  
example,  in  2010,  double cropped  soy  was  planted  earlier  to  match  the  unusually  earlier 
 onset, while single cropped  soy did not  adjust  as strongly  to the earlier onset. The  left  
side  of  double  cropped  sowing  date  histogram  in  Figure  10 pushes against the wet season 
onset, while the right side of the histogram tapers off around  110 days after  August  1  - a 
cutoff  consistent  with the need  to  harvest  soy  in  time  for  the  second  crop  to  be  
planted.  Single cropped  soy,  in contrast,  is less constricted  on both ends and its proba- 
bility density distributions  are much wider.

3.3.   Error  nnnfysis  rind validation

To quantify error at the pixel scale, we compare our estimates to the sowing  and  harvest  dates  
observed  directly  from  the  high  resolution Planet Labs imagery. These pixel-level errors 
quantify the accuracy of the sowing and  harvest  date estimation  method  itself,  independently  
of er- rors in the land cover map. Following Ed. (5), the pixel-level bias and its confidence 
interval is 6.9     16.5 days for sowing and 1.8A 18.7 days for harvest.  This error  includes  the 
 differences  between  the estimated  and reported sowing and harvest dates, and the uncertainties 
in the reported sowing and harvest dates themselves.
Errors  at  regional  scale  represent  a  of  combination  errors  in  land cover classification  
and  uncertainties  in pixel-scale  sowing and  harvest date estimates. They are shown in Table S.
Though we are unable to validate our estimates to a spatially resolved regional  dataset,  we  
ensure  that  our  estimates  agree  with  spatially

aggregated  regional  statistics.  The  estimated  sowing  and  harvest  dates indicate a mean crop 
cycle length of 112 days,  consistent  with reported values (90—120  days) (Abrahao  and Costa,  
2018).  The SAGE dataset  in- dicates  that  in Brazil,  soy is planted  in late November  and 
harvested  in late March, equivalent  to 120 and 240 days after August 1, respectively (Sachs et 
al., 2010).  This estimate  is closest  to sowing  and harvest  date estimates for single cropped 
soy in 2004 (109 and 227 days after August 1) - close to the year during  which the SAGE data were 
collected (circa 2000),  and  during  a  time  when  single  cropped  soy  was  the  dominant 
sowing   intensity.   Although  SAGE  data  represent   both  irrigated   and rainfed  cropland  
globally,  only  2.5%  of  Mato  Grosso's  row  crop  was irrigated as recently as 2017 (Hampf et 
at., 2020). Almost all soy in Mato Grosso  was  rainfed  during  the  SAGE  period.   Finally,  a  
weekly  crop progress  report  for  Mato  Grosso's  soy  is  available  from  the  Instituto 
Mato-Grossense   de   Economia   Agropecuaria   (IMEA)   agency   (IMEA, 2019). The date at which 
500Zoof Mato Grosso is planted is comparable  to the reported  values,  as shown  in Table 6. The 
SAGE and IMEA datasets address potential errors due to differences  in seed quality. Differences  
in seed  quality  may  impact  our  estimate  of  sowing  date:  poor  seeds  may germinate  more  
slowly,  or not  at  all,  creating  noisy  or even  absent  in- formation in the time series. This 
source of error would not otherwise be captured from Planet Labs as it depends on satellite-visible 
greening.
The  findings  must  be  placed  in  context  of  estimation  error.  This  is especially  
important  because  the lack  of ground  truth crop  timing  data introduced  large  uncertainties  
in  validation,  generating  imprecise  esti- mates. Our pixel scale errors (RMSE of 6.9 //-  16.5 
days for sowing and
1.8  +/-  18.7  days  for  harvest)  are  comparable   to  those  from  other satellite-based 
estimates of soy phenology  in the central US (RMSEs be- tween  3.2 and  6.9 days)  that  are  
validated  against  county-level  USDA NASS Crop Progress Reports (Ren et  a1., 2017; Urban ct at., 
 2018; Zeng et al., 2016). The lower precision of the errors in this analysis is due to the 
uncertain  nature  of  sowing  and harvest  dates derived  from Planet  Labs imagery.  
Uncertainties  due  to error in validation data are not  generally

'                                              ’*         ’”                        12

M.  zhang et a£

included in other soy phenology studies, and it is possible that the level of precision  achieved  
by  these  studies  would  be  lower  if  this  uncertainty were included  in error analysis.
Fortunately,  important  features  of sowing  behavior  can be detected despite  error  and  
imprecision  in both  the  pixel  scale  estimates  and  the land cover map. Differences between 
median sowing dates of single and double  cropped  soy (10—24  days,  depending  on the  year),  
the  trend  to- ward  earlier  sowing (13—20  days over  the study  period,  for double  and single 
cropped soy), and the delay between sowing date and onset (29—41 days) all appear clearly  against  
the magnitude  of RMSE.  While impreci- sion  at pixel  scale (16.5 days) is sizeable  compared  to 
the  detected  dif- ferences,  the imprecision  of oggregoted differences  is much lower.

4.   Discussion

The results suggest  that  the common assumption  that  the onset con- trols the sowing date of 
tropical rainfed crops is too simplistic,  and often incorrect  in  Mato  Grosso.  Instead,  Figure 
 10  reveals  a  delay  between sowing and wet season onset of up to 3 months for single cropped 
soy and up  to  2  months  for  double  cropped  soy,  a  window  first  posited  by Abrahao and 
Costa (2018) based on soy's photoperiod and climatological requirements.  Averaged  across  all  
years,  the  delay  between  onset  and sowing date was 41 days for single cropped  soy and 29 days 
for double cropped  soy. The smaller delay over double  cropped  fields is important because  much  
of  Mato  Grosso's  agricultural  revenue  depends  on  the feasibility  of  double  cropping  
(Arvor  et  at.,  2012a).  If  onset  is delayed sufficiently  to make  the earlier  sowing  dates 
of double  cropping  impos- sible, the state may suffer a loss of profit. Further, the magnitude of 
delay changed  over  time  for  all  soy:  the  delay  was  larger  in  earlier  years, suggesting  
factors  that  allow  farmers  to  plant  closer  to  the  onset  each year.  The  presence  of  a  
delay,  and  its  change  over  time,  means  that sowing  and  harvest  date  estimates  in  this  
region  should  not  be  based upon  precipitation  data  alone.   This  also  means   that   
global  datasets depicting  sowing  and  harvest  dates  and  which  rely  on  the  assumption that 
 sowing  date  occurs  at  the onset  of  the  wet  season  may  be  up to 3 months in error.
Importantly,  the presence of this delay does not mean that farmers are insensitive  to  the  wet  
season  onset.  Rather,  the  delay  between  sowing dates  and  the  wet  season  (and 
occasionally  the sanitary  break,  when  it occurs  later  than  the  onset)  could  be  
attributed  to  a  variety  of  non- climatic  factors  acting  in  conjunction  with  the  wet  
season  onset:  (1) the  time (up  to 4  weeks) needed  to complete  sowing  operations  (Pires et  
a1.,  2016),  (2)  the  result  of  logistical  and  economic  constraints  that delay farmers from 
sowing at a desired time (Waha et a1., 2012), or (3) a deliberate choice to improve soy yields: 
simulations suggest that moving sowing date from Sept 25 to Oct 5 increases soy yields by 
increasing  the precipitation received by crops (Pires et a1., 2016). In addition,  a host of 
economic, logistical, and social factors may cause farmers to accelerate or delay sowing  depending 
 on the availability  of agricultural  credit (Abra- hao  and  Costa,  2018),  crop prices 
(Borchers  et a1.,  2014),  risk  aversion (Bussmann et al., 2016; Feola et a1., 2015; Kala, 2015), 
 use of irrigation (Feola  et al., 2015), memory  of planting dates in recent  years  and other 
subjective  beliefs  (Kala,  2015),  and/or  recommendations from  agricul- tural extension 
services (Bussmann  et a1., 2016). Sowing dates therefore arise as complex decisions made by 
farmers,  based  both on climate  and culture. The causes of the deviation  between the onset and 
the observed sowing   dates  have  significant   implications   for   the  future  of  double 
cropping  in Mato Grosso,  and should be examined  further.
I-Heliyon  7 (2021)  e07436

More evidence of the non-climatic constraints on sowing can be found in  the spatial patterns  of  
sowing  dates,  emphasizing  the need  for  high- quality  sowing  data  that  can  isolate  these  
effects.  At  pixel  scale,  the maps  of  soy  sowing  and  harvest  dates  reveal  that  
differences  in  crop timing  between  nearby  fields  are  comparable  to  or  greater  than  
inter- annual  and  regional  differences  in  the  sowing  and  harvest  dates.  This suggests  
that field-scale  knowledge  is essential to characterizing sowing and harvest dates across a 
property,  an insight that should inform future survey design. For example, soil treatments,  such 
as mineral fertilization and  the  application  of  lime  to address  soil pH,  are  a staple  of  
soybean agronomy  in Mato Grosso (Neill  et  al.,  2017).  It  is possible  that  delays due to 
transportation, equipment  and labor required  to apply  soil treat- ments  may  impact  available  
sowing  dates,  contributing   to  the  large field-scale  variation  in sowing  dates.
At regional scales, a distinct spatial pattern of sowing dates emerges: the center of the state is 
planted earlier than most other areas. This could be  a result  of  the  uniquely  favorable  
climate,  soil  and  topography  sur- rounding  the BR163  highway  running  north  and south  
across  the  state (Picoli et al., 2018), or due to differences in average farm size across the 
state.  While  the  spatial  patterns  of  sowing  for  both  double  and  single cropped soy 
roughly match the spatial pattern of onset, it is clear from the spatial  patterns  remaining  in  
the  delay  (in  which  the  effect  of  onset  is taken out) that sowing dates follow a spatial 
pattern that is independent of onset. In Figure 11, the presence of a spatial pattern in delay 
indicates that  onset  is not  the  only  factor  influencing  sowing  dates.  Importantly, this  
pattern  differs  by  cropping  intensity:  sowing  dates  and  delays  for double  cropped  soy  
appear  more  spatially  homogeneous.  This  discrep- ancy  may  stem  from  differences  in  
resource  access  or  optimal  sowing time.  Single  cropping  practitioners  may  lack  the  
resources  to complete the  more  expensive  (but  more  profitable)  double  cropping  operations, 
and  farmers  located  away  from  the  central  highway  network  may  be unable  to plant as 
early  as they desire due to logistic constraints  (Picoli et  al.,  2018).  On  the  other  hand,  
the  spatial  homogeneity  in  double cropping  may result from the necessity  of sowing as early 
as possible to allow  the second crop to mature before  the dry season begins (Abrahao and  Costa,  
2018; Pires  et  at.,  2016).  Single cropping  practitioners  have more   flexibility   in   
choosing   a   yield-optimizing   time,   which   may contribute  to the spatial heterogeneity. In 
the future,  the state's growing transportation  network  (including  the  expansion  of  the  road 
 network north into the Amazon),  improvements  in technology  that allow farmers to plant  closer  
to the  wet  season  onset,  and  shifting  cropping  practices may create a changing  spatial 
pattern in sowing  dates,  highlighting  the importance   of   spatiotemporally   resolved   sowing 
  information   (Cohn et a1., 2016; Picoli  et a1., 2018).
Though  Mato  Grosso  is  the  focus  of  this  study,   the  insights  and techniques introduced 
here can be applied to understand climate risks to rainfed  agriculture   worldwide.   The  
magnitude  of  change  in  the  wet season is expected  to be concerning in many rainfed regions: 
in Malawi, the RCP8.5 climate  scenario  will shorten  the growing  season  by 20—55 days by 
midcentury  (Vizy  et  al.,  2015).  El Nino events  in Indonesia  are expected to increase in the 
probability of a highly disruptive 30-day delay in monsoon onset from 9 - 18% in 2007 to 30—40% in 
2050 (Naylor et al., 2007).  In  Burkina  Faso,  the  rainy  season  onset  will  be  delayed  by  
an average of one week in 2021—2050 compared to the 1971—2000 baseline under  the  AIB   scenario  
(Ibrahim  et  a1.,  2014),  and  in  West  Africa  the combined  effect  of  delayed  onset  and  
earlier  demise  will  cause  a  20% reduction in the length of the growing  season by 2050 (Sarr,  
2012).


Table 6. Comparing the estimated sowing and harvest dates to IMEA's weekly crop progress reports. 
IMEA does not report crop progress separately for single and double
cropped  soy.

Year             IMEA-reported  date of 50% planted
2013           October 25
2014           October 24
Estimated  date of 50% planted (SC, DC)           IMEA-reported  date of 50% harvested October 25, 
October 24                                         February  25
October 29, October 20                                         February  20


13
Estimated date of 50% harvested (SC, DC) February  27, February  12
February  28, February  16

M.  zhang ct o£

Delay (2004 —2014 average)
I-Heliyon  7  (2021)  e07436











Delay
[days after Aug 1]


40

20














Figure  11.  Estimated  delay  between  median  sowing  dates  and  onset,  averaged  from  2004  
to 2014,  in  days  after  August  1  of  the  sowing  year.  The  areas  shown
represent  only  soy  planted  in all  years  of  the study  period.


While many studies have highlighted  planting  dates'  potential  as an adaptation strategy  to a 
shortening  wet season,  there is still a need for a realistic  understanding  of  planting  
behavior  and  its  future  trajectory. Studies  that  simulate  optimal,  yield-maximizing  
planting  dates  under climate change scenarios may recommend unrealistic dates, or dates that 
prevent  intensive  cropping  systems.  In  Cameroon,  optimized  planting dates were three months 
later than traditionally observed planting dates (Laux et al., 2010); in Sudan, the recommended 
planting date was two to four weeks earlier than actual practice (Bussmann et at., 2016). The large 
gap between  actual  and  optimal  dates  suggests  that  the  optimized  sce- nario  may  not  be  
implemented  without  systematic  (and  possibly  un- likely)  changes  in  agricultural  practice. 
 Additionally,  it  is  implausible that all farmers, in their various socio-economic contexts, 
will adapt to an equal  degree.  Generation  of  a  similar  high-quality  sowing  date  dataset 
may be crucial to quantify risk to agricultural productivity,  especially in vulnerable  tropical 
and developing  regions.

5.   Conclusions

In dynamic areas like Mato Grosso, where climatic, technological, and economic factors cause sowing 
dates to shift quickly in time and space,
spatiotemporally   resolved   sowing   and   harvest   date   information   is essential to forming 
an effective response to climate change. The dataset generated   in  this  study  demonstrates   
that   the  relationship   between sowing  date  and  wet  season  onset  for  rainfed  crops  
varies  with  space, time, and cropping intensity.  Sowing estimates that assume rainfed crops in  
tropical  regions  will be planted  at  wet  season  onset,  without  consid- ering  location,  
year  and  cropping  intensity,  could  therefore  introduce errors of up to three months. We also 
observe that in Mato Grosso, double cropped  soy  is planted  closer  to  the  start  of  the  wet  
season  onset  with each passing  year.  Likely the result of improving  equipment  availability or 
 crop  varieties,  this  trend  suggests  that  a  delay  in  onset  could  force sowing to less 
favorable dates, reversing at least a decade of logistic and technological  advances. Given the 
region's heavy reliance on agricultural revenue, the resulting decline in soy yield across Mato 
Grosso could be a significant  shock.
These insights could aid efforts to assess the impact of climate change on Brazilian  agriculture  
in  a  way  that  reflects  the  diverse  non-climatic factors   that   go  into  sowing   
decisions  (Hertel  et   a1.,   2010;  Reidsma et  at.,  2010).  Crop  modeling  efforts  often  
resort  to  approximations  in which  sowing  is  triggered  based  on  precipitation,  
temperature,  or  soil moisture  (Hampf  et  al.,  2020;  Jones  et  at.,  2003;  Stockle  et  al., 
 2003;

14

M.  Zhang et o£

Elliott et al., 2015; Schlenker and Lobell, 2010). These rules perform well on a global or 
continental scale, but are less appropriate on smaller scales (Dobor  et  al.,  2016).  It  would  
be  beneficial  to  incorporate  into  these predictions  what  we  now  know  about  the  sizeable 
 and  shifting  delay between onset and sowing dates in Mato Grosso.
A  realistic  understanding  of  sowing  behavior,  and  consequently  an accurate depiction of 
future yields, is only possible with updated, highly resolved  sowing  data. By introducing  an 
estimation  method  that closes the  information  gap  on  sowing  dates  without  the  need  for  
expensive ground  survey  data,  we  gain  insights  into  sowing  behavior  for  a data- scarce  
but  agriculturally important  area.  Similar  high-quality  data  will be  valuable  for  risk  
assessment  in  regions  such  as  southern  Asia  and southern  Africa,  which  face  not  only  
the  most  severe  consequences  of warming, but also data scarcity and limited adaptive capacity 
(Laux et a1., 2010; Lobell et al., 2008).

Declarations

Author  contribution  statement

Minghui Zhang: Conceived and designed the experiments; Performed the experiments;  Analyzed and 
interpreted  the data; Wrote the paper.
Gabriel   Abrahao;   Avery  Cohn;   Sally   Thompson:   Conceived   and designed the experiments.
Jake Campolo: Performed  the experiments.

Funding statement

This work was supported by the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation, the NSF EAR-1555041,  and the NSF 
GRFP.

Data  avaiIab//try  statement

Data  associated  with  this  study  has  been  deposited   at  Moderate Resolution Imaging 
Spectroradiometer (MODIS).

Declorntion  of interests statement

The authors declare no conflict  of interest.

Additional  information

No additional information  is available for this paper.

References

Abrahao,  G.,  Costa,  M.,  2018.  Evolution  of  rain  and  photoperiod  limitations  on  the 
soybean  growing  season  in                the rise (and  possible  fall) of double-cropping 
systems.  Agric.  For.  Meteorol.  245,  32-45.
Agrosatelite,  2017. Planted  area and crop yield.  https:/Zagrosa
telite.com.brZen/products/safras/#planted-area.
Alexander,  P.,  Rabin, S.,  Anthoni, P.,  Henry, R.,  Pugh,  T.A., Rounsevell,  M.D.,  Arneth,  
A., 2018. Adaptation  of global land  use and management  intensity  to changes  in climate and  
atmospheric  carbon  dioxide.  Global  Change  Biol.  24, 1-10.
Alexandrov,  V.,  Eitzinger,  J.,  Cajic,  V., Oberforster,  M.,  2002. Potential  impact of 
climate change on selected agricultural crops in north-eastern  Austria. Global Change Biol. 8, 
372-389.
Anwar,  M.R.,  Liu,  D.L.,  Macadam,  I.,  Kelley,  G.,  2013.  Adapting  agriculture  to climate 
change:  a review.  Theor.  Appl.  Climatol.  113,  225—245.
Arvor, D.,  Dubreuil,  V.,  Simoes, M.,  Begue,  A.,  2012a. Mapping  and spatial analysis of the 
soybean agricultural frontier in mato grosso, Brazil, using remote sensing data. Geo J. 78,  
833-850.
Arvor, D.,  Meirelles, M.,  Dubreuil,  V.,  Begue, A.,  Shimabukuro,  Y.E., 2012b.  Analyzing  the 
agricultural  transition  in mato  grosso,  Brazil,  using  satellite-derived indices.  Appl. 
Geogr.  32,  702—713.
Arvor,  D.,  Dubreuil,  V.,                      J.,  Simoes, M.,  Funatsu,  B.M., 2014.  Spatial 
patterns of rainfall  regimes  related  to levels  of double  cropping  agriculture  systems  in 
mato grosso (Brazil).  Int.  J.  Climatol.  34, 2622-2633.
B.S., Cossar,  R.D.,  2009.  Caster  yield  in response  to planting  date  at four
locations  in  the  south-central  United  States.  Tndust.  Crops Prod.  29, 316-319.
//e/iyon 7  (2021)  e07436

Becker,  W.R.,  Silva,  L.C.d.A.,  Richetti,  J.,   Lo,  T.B.,  Johann,  J.A., 2020.  Harvest  date 
forecast  for soybeans  from maximum  vegetative  development  using  satellite  images. Int.  J.  
Rem.  Sens.  42,  1121-1138.
Begue,  A.,  Lebourgeois,  V.,  Bappel,  E.,  Todoroff,  P.,  Pellegrino,  A.,  Baillarin,  F., 
Siegmund,  B.,  2010.  Spatio-temporal  variability  of sugarcane  fields and recommendations for  
yield  forecast  using  ndvi.  Int.  J.  Rem.  Sens.  31,  5391—5407.
Begue,  A.,  Arvor, D.,  Bellon, B.,  Betbeder,  J.,   de Abelleyra, D.,  Ferraz, R.,  Lebourgeois, 
 V.,
C.,  Simoes,  M.,  Veron,  S.,  2018.  Remote sensing  and  cropping  practices:  a review.  Rem.  
Sens.  10, 1-32.
Bolton, D.,              J.,  Melaas, E.,  Moon, M.,  Eklundh, L.,  Friedl, M.,  2020. 
Continental-scale land surface  phenologyfrom  harmonized  landsat  8 and  sentinel-2  imagery.  
Rem.
Sens.  Environ.  240,  1—16.
Borchers,  A.,  Truex-Powell,  E.,  Wallander,  S.,  Nickerson,  C.,  2014.  Multi-cropping 
practices:  recent  trends in double-cropping. U. S. Dep. Agric. Econom. Informat.  Bull. 125,  
1-22.
Boschetti,  M., Stroppiana,  D., Brivio, P., Bocchi, S., 2009. Multi-year  monitoring  of rice crop 
phenology  through  time series analysis  of modis  images.  Int.  J.  Rem.  Sens.  30, 4643—4662.
Brito, S., 2017.  Atlas da irriga § ao mostra estudo do uso da’agua na agricultura nacional.
Agencia Nacional  deAguas,  Embrapa.
Brown, J.C., Kastens,  J.H., Coutinho, A.C., Victoria, D.d.C., Bishop, C.R., 2013. Classifying 
multiyear  agricultural  land use data from mato grosso using time-series  modis vegetation  index  
data.  Rem.  Sens.  Environ.  130,  39-50.
Bussmann,  A., Elagib,  N.A., Fayyad,  M., Ribbe, L., 2016.  Sowing  date determinants  for 
sahelian  rainfed agriculture  in the context  of agricultural  policies and  water management.  
Land Use Pol. 52,  316—328.
Challinor,  A.,  Watson,  J.,   Lobell,  D., Howden,  S., Smith,        Chhetri,  N., 2014.  A 
meta- analysis  of crop  yield under  climate change and adaptation.  Nat.  Clim.  Change  4, 
287-291.
Clinton, N., 2017.  Time Series  Analysis  in Earth  engine.goo.gl/lMwd2Y. (Accessed  24 June 
2018).
Cohn,  A.S.,  VanWey,  L.K., Spera,  S.S., Mustard,  J.F., 2016.  Cropping  frequency  and area 
response  to climate  variability  can exceed  yield response.           Clim.  Change 6, 601—604.
Correa, P., Schmidt, C., 2014. Public research organizations and agricultural development in 
Brazil:  how  did embrapa  get  it right* The World Bank  145,  1—10.
Costa, M., Pires, G., 2010. Effects of amazon and central Brazil deforestation  scenarios on the 
duration of  the dry season in the  arc of deforestation. Int.  J.  Climatol.  30, 1970—1979.
Dharmarathna,  W., Herath,  S., Weerakoon,  S., 2014.  Changing  the planting  date as a climate    
            adaptation  strategy for rice  production  in kurunegala  district,  Sri Lanka.  
Sustain.  Sci.  9,  103-107.
Dobor,  L., Barcza,  Z., Hlasny,  T.,  Arendas,  T., Spitko,  T., Fodor,  N., 2016.  Crop planting 
date matters:  estimation methods  and  effect  on future  yields.              For.  Meteorol. 
223, 103-115.
Dounias,  I.,  Aubry,  C., Capillon,  A., 2003.  Decision-making processes  for crop
management  on african farms.modelling  from a case study  of cotton crops  in northern  Cameroon.  
Agric.  Syst. 73, 233-260.
Dubreuil,  V., Debortoli,  N., Funatsu,  B., Nedelec,        Durieux,  L., 2012.  Impact  of land- 
cover  change  in the southern  amazonia  climate:  a case  study  for  the region of  alta 
floresta,  mato grosso,  Brazil.  Environ.  Monitor.  Assess.  184,  877—891.
Elliott,  J.,  Muller,  C., Deryng,  D., Chryssanthacopoulos, J.,  Boote,  K., Buchner,  M., 
Foster,  I., et  al., 2015.  The global  gridded  crop model intercomparison: data and modeling 
protocols for phase 1 (v1.0).Geoscientific Model Development, 8, 261-277.
Farr,  T.G., Rosen,  P.A.,  Caro, E.,  et al., 2007.  The  shuttle  radar topography  mission. Re.
Geophys.  45,  1—33.
Feola,  G., Lerner,  A.M.,  Jain, M., Montefrio,  M.J.F., Nicholas,  K.A.,  2015.  Researching 
farmer  behaviour  in climate  change  adaptation  and                       agriculture:  lessons 
learned  from five case  studies.  J.  Rural Stud.  39, 78—84.
Fu, R., Yin, L., Li, W., et a1., 2013. Increased  dry-season length          southern amazonia in 
recent decades  and its implication for future climate projection.  Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 1073,  
1-6.
Gao, F.,  Anderson,  M., Daughtry,  C., Karnieli,  A., Hively,  D., Kustas,  W., 2020.  A within- 
season approach  for detecting  early  growth stages  in corn and soybean  using high temporal and 
spatial resolution  imagery.  Rem.  Sens.  Environ.  242,  1—19.
Geerken,  R.A., 2009.  An algorithm  to classify  and monitor  seasonal  variations  in vegetation 
phenologies and the inter-annual change. ISPRS J.  Photogram. Rem. Sens. 64,  422-431.
Gourdji,  S.M.,  Sibley,  A.M., Lobell,  D.B.,  2013.  Global  crop exposure  to critical  high 
temperatures  in the reproductive  period: historical  trends  and  future  project.
Environ.  Res.  Lett.  8, 1—10.
Grassini,  P., van Bussel,  L.G., et aI., 2015. How  good is good enough"  data requirements for 
reliable  crop  yield simulations  and  yield-gap  analysis.  Field firops Res.  177,
49-63.
Hampf,  A.C., Stella,  T., Berg-Mohnicke, M., Kawohl,  T., Kilian,  M., Nendel,  C., 2020. Future  
yields  of double-cropping systems  in  the  southern  amazon,  Brazil,  under climate  change and  
technological  development.  Agric.  Syst.  177,  1—18.
Hassan,  R.M.,  Nhemachena,  C., 2008.  Determinants  of african farmers'  strategies  for adapting 
 to climate  change:  multinomial  choice analysis.  Res.  Agric.  Appl.  Econom. 3,  83—104.
Hertel, T.W., Burke, M.B., Lobell, D.B., 2010. The poverty implications of climate-induced crop  
yield changes  by 2030.  Glob.                  Change  20, 577-585.
Hmimina,  G., Dufrene,  E., Pontailler,  J.,  Delpierre,  N., et  al., 2013.  Evaluation  of  the 
potential of modis satellite  data to predict  vegetation  phenology  in different  biomes: an 
investigation  using  ground-based  ndvi measurements.  Rem.  Sens.  Environ.  132, 145—158.

15

M.  Zhang et o£

Howden, S.M., Soussana,  J.-F., Tubiello, F.N., Chhetri,  N., Dunlop, M., Meinke,  H., 2007. 
Adapting  agriculture  to climate change.  Proc. Nat.  Acad.  Sci.  104,  19691-19696.
Ibrahim, B., Karambiri, H., Polcher, J.,  Yacouba, H., Ribstein, P., 2014. Changes in rainfall 
regime over Burkina Faso under  the climate  change conditions  simulated  by 5 regional climate 
models.  Clim.  Dyn.  42, 1363—1 381.
T., Kim,  W., Nishimori,  M., 2019. Modeling  the global  sowing  and harvesting windows of major 
crops around the year 2000. J.  Adv. Model. Earth Syst. 11, 99-112.
IMEA,  2019.  Crop progress report.imea.com.br/imea-site/relatorios-mercado.
Jones,  J.,  Hoogenboom,  G., Porter,  C., Boote, K., Batchelor,  W., Hunt, L.,  Wilkens,  P., 
Singh,  U., Gijsman,  A., Ritchie,  J.,  2003.  The dssat  cropping  system  model.  Eur.  J. 
Agronomy  18,  235—265.
Jonsson, P., Edklundh, L., 2004. Timesat — a program for analyzing  time-series of satellite sensor 
data.  Comp.  Geosci.  30, 833—845.
N., 2015. Ambiguity aversion and learning in a changing world:  the potential effects of climate  
change fro India agriculture.  Working  Paper.
Kastens,  J.H.,  Brown,  J.C., Coutinho,  A.C., Bishop,  C.R.,  Esquerdo,  J.C.D.,  2017.  Soy 
moratorium  impacts  on soybean  and deforestation  dynamics  in mato grosso,  Brazil. PLoS ONE 12, 
 1—21.
Khanal,  U., Wilson,  C., Hoang,  V.-N.,  Lee,  B., 2018. Farmers'  adaptation  to climate change,  
its determinants  and impacts  on rice yield  in Nepal.  EcoI.  Econ.  144, 139-147.
Knox,  J.,   Hess,  T., Daccache,  A.,  Wheeler,  T., 2012.  Climate  change  impacts  on crop 
productivity  in african  and south asia. Environ.  Res. Lett. 7, 1-8.
Kucharik,  C.J., 2006.  A multidecadal  trend  of earlier corn planting  in the central  USA. 
Agronomy  J.  98, 1544—1550.
Kucharik,  C.J., Serbin,  S.P.,  2008. Impacts  of recent climate  change  on Wisconsin  corn and 
soybean  yieldtrends.                   Res. Lett.  3, 1—10.
Laux, P., Jackel, G., Tingem,  R.M., Kunstmann,  H., 2010.  Impact  of climate change on 
agricultural  productivity  under  rainfed  conditions  in Cameroon  - a method  to improve 
attainable  crop  yields  by planting  dateadaptations.  Agric.  For.  Meteorol. 150,  1258—1271.
Liebmann,  B., Camargo,  S.J., Seth,  A., Marengo,  J.A., Carvalho,  L.M.,  Allured,  D., Fu, R., 
Vera, C.S., 2007. Onset and end of the rainy season in south America in observations and  the echam 
 4.5 atmospheric  general circulation  model.  Am.  Meteorol.  Soc.
Clim.  20,  2037-2050.
Liu,  Y., Dai, L., 2020.  Modelling  the  impacts of climate change  and crop  management measures  
on soybean  phenology  in China.  J.  Cleaner Prod.  262,  1—10.
Lobell,  D.B., Burke,  M.B., Tebaldi,  C., Mastrandrea,  M.D., Falcon,  W.P.,  Naylor,  R.L., 2008. 
Prioritizing  climate change adaptation needs for food security in 2030. Science 319,  607—610.
Lobell,  D.B., Ortiz-Monasterio,  J.I., Sibley,  A.M., Sohu,                    Satellite  
detection of earlier  wheat sowing  in India and  implications  for yield  trends.  Agric.  Syst.  
115, 137-143.
Ma,  S., Churkina,  G., Trusilova,  K., 2012.  Investigating  the impact  of                change 
on crop phenological  events in europe  with a phenology  model.  Int.  J.  Biometeorol.  56, 
749—763.
Mapbiomas,  P., 2019. Mapbiomas  - collection  3.1 of brazilian  land cover & use map series.  
http://mapbiomas.org/.
0.  B., P. G., NASA Goddard  Space Flight  Center,  Ocean  Ecology  Laboratory,  2019a. Moderate  
Resolution  Imaging  Spectroradiometer (Modis) Aqua myd09a1.006.
0.  B., P. G., NASA Goddard  Space Flight  Center,  Ocean Ecology Laboratory,  2019b. Moderate  
Resolution  Imaging  Spectroradiometer (Modis) Terra mod09a1.006.
Naylor,  R.L., Battisti, D.S.,  Vimont,  D.J., Falcon,  W.P., Burke,  M.B., 2007.  Assessing  risks 
of climate  variability  and climate  change  for Indonesian  rice agriculture.  Proc.  Nat. Acad.  
Sci.  104, 7752-7757.
Neill,  C., Jankowski,  K., Brando,  P.M., et  al., 2017.  Surprisingly  modest  water  quality 
impacts  from expansion  and                             of large-scale  commercial  agriculture  
in the brazilian  amazon-cerrado region.  Trop.  Conserv.  Sci.  10,  1—5.
Ortiz-Monasterio, J.,  Dhillon,  S., Fischer,  R., 1994.  Date  of sowing  effects  on grain yield 
and  yield components  of irrigated spring  wheat  cultivars  and relationships  with radiation  
and  temperature  in ludhiana,  India.  Field Crops Res.  37, 169-184.
Pan,  Z., Huang,  J.,  Zhou, Q., Wang,  L., et  al., 2015. Mapping crop phenology  using  ndvi 
time-series  derived  from  hj-la/b data.  Int.  J.  Appl.  Earth  Observ.  Geoinformat.  34, 
188—197.
Picoli,  M., fiamara,  G., Sanches,  I., Simoes,  R., Carvalho,  A., et  aI., 2018.  Big earth 
observation  time series  analysis  for monitoring  brazilian  agriculture.  ISPRS  J.
Rem.  Sens.  145,  328-339.
Pires, G.F., Abrahao,  G.M.,  Brumatti,  L.M.,  Oliveira,  L.J., H, C.M.,  Liddicoat,  E.,
Kato,  Spencerand,  Ladle, R.J., 2016.  Increased  climate  risk  in brazilian  double cropping  
agriculture  systems: Implications  for land use in northern Brazil.  Agric. For. Meteorol.  228,  
286—298.
Planet, 2017. Planet application program interface: in space for life on earth. https://api.p 
1anet.com.
//e/iyon 7  (2021)  e07436

Reed, B.,  Schwartz,         Xiao, X.,  2009.  Phenology  of Ecosystem  Processes.  Springer,  New 
York,  New  York.
Reidsma,  P.,  Ewert,  F.,  Lansink,  A.O.,  Leemans,  R.,  2010.  Adaptation  to climate  change 
and  climate  variability  in european  agriculture:  the  importance  of  farm  level responses.  
Eur.  J.  Agronom.  32,  91—102.
Ren,  J.,  Campbell,  J.B., Shao,  Y.,  2017.  Estimation  of sos and eos for midwestern  us corn 
and  soybean  crops.  Rem.  Sens.  9,  1-14.
Rosenzweig,  C.,  Elliott,  J.,   et  al.,  2014.  Assessing  agricultural  risks of climate  
change  in the  21st  century  in a global  gridded  crop  model comparison.  Proc.  Nat.  Acad.  
Sci. 111,  3268-3273.
Sacks, W., Deryng, D.,  Foley, J.,  Ramankutty, N.,  2010. Crop planting dates: an analysis of 
global  patterns.  Glob.  EcoI.  Biogeogr.  19,  607—620.
Sakamoto,  T.,  Van Nguyen,  N.,  Ohno,  H.,  Ishitsuka,  N.,  Yokozawa,  M.,  2005.  A crop 
phenology  detection  method  using  time-series  modis  data.  Rem.  Sens.  Environ.  96, 366-374.
Sarr, B., 2012. Present  and future climate change in the semi-arid  region of west africa: a 
crucial input for practical  adaptation  in agriculture.  Atmospher.  Sci. Lett.  13, 108—112.
Schlenker,  W., Lobell,  D.B.,  2010.  Robust  negative  impacts  of climate  change  on african 
agriculture.  Environ.  Res.  Lett.  5,  1—20.
Schmidhuber,  J.,   Tubiello,            2007.  Global  food  security  under  climate change.  
Proc.
Nat.  Acad.  Sci.  104,  19703-19708.
Shumway,  R.,  Stoffer,  D.,  2017.  Time  series  analysis  and  its  applications:  with R 
examples.
Soltani,  A.,  Sinclair,  T.,  2012.  Modeling Physiology  of  Crop Development,  Growth  and 
Yield.  fiAB International.
Spera, S.A., Winter,            Partridge,  T.F., 2020. Brazilian maize  yields negatively  
affected by  climate  after  land  clearing.  Nature Sustain.  3,  845-852.
Stockle, C.O.,  Donatelli,  M., Nelson,  R., 2003.  Cropsyst,  a cropping  systems  simulation
model.  Eur.  J.   Agronomy  18,  289-307.
Thies,  J.,   Singleton,  P.,  Bohlool,  B.,  1995.  Phenology,  growth,  and yield of  field-grown 
soybean  and  bush  bean  as  a function  of  varying  modes  of n nutrition.  Soil Biol. Biochem.  
27, 575—583.
Thornton,  P.K., Kristjanson,  P.,  Forch, W., Barahona,  C.,  Cramer,        Pradhan,  S.,  2018.  
Is agricultural  adaptation  to global change  in lower-income  countries  on track  to meet the  
future  food  production  challenge°  Global  Environ.  Change  52,  37-48.
Urban,  D.,  Guan, K.,  Jain, M.,  2018.  Estimating  sowing  dates  from satellite data over  the
u.s. midwest:  a comparison of multiple sensors and metrics. Rem. Sens. Environ. 211, 400—412.
Victoria,  D.d.C.,  da Pax,  A.R.,  Coutinho,             Kastens,  J.,   Brown,  J.C.,  2012.  
Cropland
area  estimates  using modis ndvi  time series in the state of mato  grosso,  Brazil. Pesquisa  
Agropecuaria  Brasileira  47,  1270-1278.
Vizy,  E.K.,  Cook,  K.H.,  Chimphamba,  J.,   McCusker,  B.,  2015.  Projected  changes  in 
season.  Clim.  Dynam.  45,  1673-1698.
Wagenseil,  H.,  Samimi, C.,  2006. Assessing spatio-temporal variations  in plant phenology using 
fourier analysis on ndvi time series: results from a dry savannah environment  in Namibia.  Int.  
J.  Rem.  Sens.  27,  3455—3471.
Waha, K.,  van Bussel,  L., Muller,  C., Bondeau,  A., 2012.  Climate-driven simulation  of
global crop  sowing  dates.  Global EcoI.  Biogeogr.  21,  247-259.
Waha,  K.,  Muller,  C.,  Bondeau,  A.,  Dietrich,  J.,   Kurukulasuriya, P.,                   J., 
  Lotze- Campen,  H.,  2013.  Adaptation  to climate  change  through  the  choice  of cropping 
system and sowing  date in sub-saharan  africa.  Global Environ.  Change  23, 130—143.
Waongo,  M.,  Laux,  P.,  Traore,  S.,  Sanon,  M.,  Kunstmann,  H.,  2014.  A crop model  and 
fuzzy  rule based approach  for optimizing  maize planting  dates  in Burkina Faso,  west africa.  
J.  Appl.  Meteorol.  Climatol.  53, 598-613.
Xavier,  A.C.,  King,  C.W.,  Scanlon,  B.R.,  2016.  Daily  gridded  meteorological variables  in 
Brazil (1980—2013).  Int.  J.  Climatol.  36,  2644-2659.
Zalles,  V.,  Hansen,  M.C.,  Potapov,  P.V.,  et  al., 2019.  Near doubling  of Brazil's  
intensive row  crop area  since  2000.  Proc.  Nat.  Acad.  Sci.  116,  428—435.
Zeng,  L.,  Wardlow,  B.D.,  Wang,  R.,  Shan,  J.,   Tadesse,  T.,  Hayes,  M.J., Li, D.,  2016.
A hybrid approach for detecting corn and soybean phenology  with time-series  modis data.  Rem.  
Sens.  Environ.  181,  237-250.
Zhang,  M., Abrahao,  G., Thompson,  S., 2021.  Sensitivity  of soybean  planting date to wet 
season onset  in mato  grosso,  Brazil  and  implications  under  climate  change (accepted).  
Clim.  Change.
Zhang,  X.,  Friedl,  M.A.,  Schaaf,  C.B., Strahler,  A.H.,  Hodges,  J.fi., Gao, F.,  Feed,  
B.C.,
Huete, A., 2003. Monitoring  vegetation  phenology  using modis. Rem. Sens.
84,  471-475.
Zhang,  X., Wang,  J.,  Henebry, G.M., Gao, F.,  2020. Development  and evaluation of a new 
algorithm  for detecting  30 m  land  surface  phenology  from viirs  and hls  time series. ISPRS  
J.  Photogram.  Rem.  Sens.  161,  37—51.
Zhong,  L.,  Hu, L.,  Gong, P.,  Biging,  G.S., 2016.  Automated  mapping  of soybean  and corn 
using  phenology.  ISPRS  J.  Photogram.  Rem.  Sens.  119,  151—164.










16
