See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/312173759

Variations in rice cultivation practices in the Senegal River Valley between
2003 and 2014: an analysis based on MODIS time series

Poster · May 2016

DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.2.16939.85285

CITATIONS
0

4 authors, including:

Lorenzo Busetto
Italian National Research Council

101 PUBLICATIONS   2,900 CITATIONS   

SEE PROFILE

Sander J. Zwart
International Water Management Institute

108 PUBLICATIONS   2,414 CITATIONS   

SEE PROFILE

READS
118

Mirco Boschetti
Italian National Research Council

164 PUBLICATIONS   3,166 CITATIONS   

SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

Novel Approaches for Efficient Targeting and Equitable Scaling of Rice Technologies’ (ETES-Rice) View project

Mapping rice production environments in West-Africa View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Lorenzo Busetto on 10 January 2017.

The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Variations in rice cultivation practices in the Senegal River Valley between 

2003 and 2014: an analysis based on MODIS time series 

Lorenzo Busetto1; Mirco Boschetti1; Sander Zwart2; Francesco Collivignarelli3 

1 Institute for remote Sensing of the Environment, National Research Council, Italy (CNR-IREA); 2Africa Rice Center, 01 BP 2031, Cotonou, Benin;                        

3 sarmap SA, Cascine di Barico 10, 6989 Purasca, Switzerland 

Introduction and Objectives 

Study Area 

•

Irrigated rice cultivation in the Senegal River Valley has shifted to from the 
wet to the dry season in recent years. Moreover, private and government 
investments have led to doubling rice acreage since 2007.  

• Temperature extremes (both hot and cold) during the rice growing season 
frequently  lead  to  yield  losses  or  failure.  Better  knowledge  is  therefore 
required  on    where  and  when  rice  is  cultivated  and  which  areas  are 
potentially mostly affected by meteorological extremes. 

• Objective  of  this  work  was  to  analyze  the    inter-annual  variations  of 
agricultural practices in the Senegal River Valley starting form time series 
of MODIS images. 

• Analysis  was  conducted  on  the 
Senegal River Valley (SRV) area. 

•

the 

of 

In  particular,  analysis  was 
focused  on  areas  classified  as 
«irrigated  agricultural  areas» 
on 
a 
photointerpretation  of  2014 
satellite 
high-resolution 
imagery  conducted  by  Africa 
Rice Center personnel.  

basis 

The Senegal River Valley area 

Methods 

• Inter-annual variation of agricultural practices were analyzed applying the PhenoRice algorithm (Boschetti et al., 2014) to 2003-2014 time series of 16-days 

composite vegetation indexes 250m resolution MODIS data. 

• Images were downloaded and pre-processed using the MODIStsp “R” package (https://github.com/lbusett/MODIStsp) to derive time series of EVI 

vegetation index and NDFI flooding index (Boschetti et al., 2009) 

• Rice phenological dates  were then derived as shown in the figure below. The algorithm is able to detect multiple growing seasons, by “splitting” the year 

into  periods defined by the user, and conducting a separate analysis in each period.  This allows to flexibly account for variability in crop calendars and 
cropping intensity in the different areas of the world.  

Sowing 

 Date at which a minimum 
followed by a clear «Rice 

Signal» and associated with 
flooding conditions (NDFI > 0) 
is found in smoothed EVI time 

series  

Dry Season 

Wet Season 

Flowering 

 Median date for which 

smoothed EVI is above the 
90°  precentile of the      

min-max range 

Rice Signal 

Fast EVI increase followed 

by a maximum in an 
agonomically sound 
period, and by a fast 

decrease 

Retrieval of phenological dates for a pixel with a clear bi-seasonal signal  

Results 

• Results  highlighted  a  clear  shift  in  cultivation  patterns  in  the  SRV  in 
the  last  years,  with  an  increase  of  rice  area,  in  particular  in  the  dry 
season (Sowing dates between February and April). 

• PhenoRice results allowed to easily depict the shifting in SRV area 

cultivation practices, and analyze interannual variability in rice 
seasonality. 

Dry  Wet 

Dry  Wet 

Dry  Wet 

Dry  Wet 

Dry  Wet 

Dry  Wet 

Dry  Wet 

Dry  Wet 

Dry  Wet 

Dry  Wet 

Dry  Wet 

Statistical distribution of retrieved sowing dates 

• Comparison  with  official  statistics  highlighted  that  PhenoRice  was 
able to correctly follow the inter-annual variations of rice cultivated 
areas in the two seasons.  

Sowing date maps for 2007 and 2014 on one of the main SRV rice areas 

Wet Season 

Dry Season 

Conclusions 

• Results  highlighted  the  usefulness  of  MODIS  time  series  and  the 
PhenoRice  algorithm  for  detecting  shifts  in  agricultural  practices  over 
large areas. 

• Phenological maps derived from PhenoRice allow to  highlight the spatial 
and temporal variability of rice seasonality, and can be important input 
sources for spatialized crop modelling studies . 

Comparison between official and PhenoRice interannual variations of  rice area 

View publication stats
View publication stats

The research leading to these results has received funding from the European Union Seventh Framework Programme 

(FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement n° 606983 (www.ermes-fp7space.eu/) 

