Remote Sensing of Environment 211 (2018) 400–412

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Remote Sensing of Environment

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/rse

Estimating sowing dates from satellite data over the U.S. Midwest: A
comparison of multiple sensors and metrics
Daniel Urbana,⁎, Kaiyu Guanb,⁎, Meha Jainc

T

a Stanford University, Department of Earth System Science, Stanford, CA, United States
b Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Sciences and National Center for Supercomputing Center, University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, Champaign,
IL, United States
c School for Environment and Sustainability, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Sowing date
EVI
Solar-induced ﬂuorescence
Backscatter
U.S. Midwest

Crop sowing date information is important for driving crop models and estimating crop yield. However, data on
sowing dates are often scarce for both developed and developing countries, making remote sensing approaches
to map sowing date an attractive approach. Yet the relative merits of diﬀerent satellite sensors and metrics to
estimate sowing date have not been well studied. We assess and compare the accuracies and uncertainties of
satellite-derived sowing date estimates using diﬀerent metrics (inﬂection point and threshold approaches) and
satellite sensors that cover the range in the electromagnetic spectrum (optical, ﬂuorescence, and radar). We
validate these estimates using a county-level dataset derived from area-weighted ﬁeld-level reported sowing
dates for maize and soybean in the US states of Iowa, Illinois, and Indiana, and conduct our analysis both at the
county level and at the aggregated tri-state region. We speciﬁcally use the Enhanced Vegetation Index (EVI) from
Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS), solar-induced ﬂuorescence (SIF) from Global Ozone
Monitoring Experiment-2 (GOME-2) and Ku-band backscattering from QuikSCAT (dB). We also compare the
inﬂection point method and the threshold approach that deﬁnes sowing date as a speciﬁc threshold value (10%,
30% and 50%) between the minimum and maximum value in a logistic-curve smoothed phenology. We ﬁnd that
satellite-based estimate of sowing dates from all methods and sensors shows a wide range of predictive power at
the county level, with R2 ranging between 0.15 and 0.90, with signiﬁcant variation across sensors. SIF has
excellent prediction for more counties than the other sensors, but EVI performs more consistently with moderate
to good prediction for the greatest bulk of counties among all sensors, while dB's predicted sowing dates are
negatively correlated with observed dates for most counties. For each sensor, aggregation to the regional level
produces time series of predicted sowing dates that more successfully capture linear time trends and inter-annual
variability. Adjusting for spring temperatures and crop areal coverage signiﬁcantly improves the accuracies of
the estimated sowing dates at both the county and regional scales. Among the combinations of the three satellite
products and four metrics, we ﬁnd using SIF and/or EVI and the 30% threshold metric have the highest ac-
curacies in terms of reproducing inter-annual variability and minimizing RMSE at regional scales. This study
provides a systematic assessment of using diﬀerent satellite sensors and metrics to estimate county- to regional-
scale crop sowing dates, which has important implications for mapping sowing date in data-limited regions
across the globe.

1. Introduction

Sowing date has been found to be an important factor inﬂuencing
the ﬁnal yield of many crops, including rice, wheat, and maize, in
multiple regions across the globe (Barraclough and Leigh, 1984; Cirilo
and Andrade, 1996; Lansigan et al., 2000; Lobell and Ortiz-Monasterio,
2007). One reason for this strong relationship is that sowing date
mediates the weather experienced by a crop throughout the growing

season, which can have large impacts on crop's physiology and growth
(Ortiz-Monasterio et al., 1994; Otegui et al., 1995). For example, stu-
dies have shown that in northern India, wheat yield decreases by ap-
proximately 1% for every day of late planting (Ortiz-Monasterio et al.,
1994), primarily because the crop is more likely to experience terminal
heat stress during the critical grain ﬁlling period (Reynolds et al., 1994;
Farooq et al., 2011). Similar cases have been found in the corn-growing
regions of the U.S. Midwest where average corn yields tend to decrease

⁎ Corresponding authors.
E-mail addresses: durban@stanford.edu (D. Urban), kaiyug@illinois.edu (K. Guan).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2018.03.039
Received 8 October 2017; Received in revised form 24 March 2018; Accepted 27 March 2018
0034-4257/ © 2018 Published by Elsevier Inc.

D. Urban et al.

Remote Sensing of Environment 211 (2018) 400–412

with later sowing, primarily due to decreased moisture availability and
increased heat stress during the vegetation and reproductive stages
(Irwin et al., 2015; Nafziger, 2015). Estimating sowing date is also
important as it is a key parameter used in process-based or empirical
crop models to quantify crop yields (Moulin et al., 1998; Lobell et al.,
2009). Given the importance of sowing date for understanding ﬁnal
yield outcomes, it would be beneﬁcial to identify current sowing dates,
sowing date trends through time, and what impacts of shifting sowing
dates are on yields for a variety of crops at regional to global scales.

Despite the agronomic importance of sowing date, few census da-
tasets collect this information or release these data to the public. Even
when these data are released, they are often shared at aggregated re-
gional scales (e.g. district- or state-level statistics produced by the US
Department of Agriculture (USDA) Crop Progress Report). Many studies
have therefore relied on satellite imagery to map sowing date at ﬁne
spatial resolutions across large spatial and temporal scales (Sakamoto
et al., 2005; Lobell and Ortiz-Monasterio, 2007; Lobell et al., 2012).
Diﬀerent satellite datasets, particularly high-temporal resolution pro-
ducts like MODIS, have been used to map crop phenology and estimate
sowing date of a given crop. Satellite sensors detect crop phenology by
measuring changes in crop color or biomass through either reﬂectance
from optical remote sensing (Moulin et al., 1998), backscattering from
active microwave (Vereecken et al., 2012), or passive microwave
emission (Jones et al., 2011). Since crop emergence, which can be de-
tected by satellites, usually occurs within a short and relatively constant
period after the actual sowing date (Lobell et al., 2012), some algo-
rithms have been proposed to extract sowing date from remotely sensed
phenologies. For example, many studies have shown that the inﬂection
point in a MODIS Vegetation Index time series (Zhang et al., 2003) can
eﬀectively approximate sowing date – these results have been shown to
hold true for multiple crops, like rice and soybean, in various regions
across the globe (Sakamoto et al., 2006; Wardlow et al., 2006; Galford
et al., 2008; Jain et al., 2017). Other studies have shown that sowing
date can be better approximated by identifying the period when a cri-
tical amount of biomass has been achieved during the crop's growth
cycle (Boschetti et al., 2009; Lobell et al., 2012). While there are many
studies that apply a range of metrics to estimate green-up or leaf-
ﬂushing for natural ecosystems (White et al., 2009; Guan et al., 2014a),
few studies have compared multiple methods to map sowing date for
croplands. Since multiple metrics have been shown to successfully map
sowing dates in individual studies, it is important to compare these
various metrics and develop a more mechanistic understanding of the
possible diﬀerences produced by these various metrics.

Furthermore, while satellite data have been used for decades to map
sowing dates, previous studies have primarily relied on Vegetation
Indices (VIs) calculated from visible and near-infrared (NIR) bands to
detect vegetation green up through the crop's growth cycle (Sakamoto
et al., 2005; Wardlow et al., 2006; Galford et al., 2008). Though this
approach has been widely used and has eﬀectively mapped sowing date
in previous studies, satellite data at other spectral ranges have been
much less explored for this purpose. Speciﬁcally, radar data (e.g.
backscattering signals from active microwave) and the newly emergent
solar-induced ﬂuorescence (SIF) data are of particular interest, as they
both contain diﬀerent and complementary information to the VIs (Guan
et al., 2017). For example, VIs are related to the vegetation greenness
and photosynthesis potential
(Sellers et al., 1992). Radar back-
scattering, on the other hand, provides more information related to the
water contents
landscape (Ulaby, 1987;
Vereecken et al., 2012). Finally, SIF directly detects photosynthetic
activity (e.g. electron transport rate) (Guanter et al., 2014; van der van
der Tol et al., 2014; Guan et al., 2016). As more new satellite sensors
have been recently launched or will be in the near future (e.g. the
onboard OCO-2 for SIF, Sentinel-1 for C-band backscattering), under-
standing the potential uses of these existing and/or new datasets will be
important for furthering crop-monitoring applications.

in the canopy and/or

Our study uses methods from previous studies (e.g.

inﬂection,

thresholds of maximum value in a phenology) as well as diﬀerent sa-
tellite sensors (e.g. optical, radar, and ﬂuorescence) to identify the most
eﬀective way to map sowing date for maize and soybean in the Corn
Belt of the United States. We speciﬁcally focus our study in the states of
Iowa, Indiana, and Illinois, as we have a rich validation dataset of maize
and soybean sowing dates at the county level across this region. We are
primarily interested in assessing which method and product combina-
tion can best map (1) absolute sowing dates, (2) sowing date spatial
patterns, and (3) temporal variability in sowing dates from 2000 to
2012. To our best knowledge, this is one of the ﬁrst studies that has
compared multiple satellite products, such as radar and ﬂuorescence,
with more traditional optical remote sensing products, such as MODIS
EVI, to map sowing date. While our results are likely speciﬁc to corn
and soybean in the Midwestern United States, we also discuss which
factors, such as weather variations, can lead to bias in our sowing date
estimates. Thus, by identifying the possible mechanisms for biases
across diﬀerent sensor-by-metric combinations, we aim to develop a
more general understanding of which method(s) or product(s) can be
used to accurately map sowing dates for diﬀerent crops and in diﬀerent
regions at the regional to global scales.

2. Materials and methods

2.1. Validation data

We used a partially sampled dataset from the Risk Management
Agency (RMA) of USDA which contains 100 randomly sampled ﬁelds
for both maize and soybean for each county in the states of Iowa,
Indiana, and Illinois for every year from 1995 to 2012 as described in
(Lobell et al., 2014). This dataset provides a unique opportunity to
assess satellite-derived sowing dates at the county level, since most
publicly reported sowing date statistics are at the state level. We have
compared these county-level data (aggregated to the state level) with
state-level phenology information from “Crop Progress Reports” from
the USDA's National Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS). Though our
study focuses on county-level results, the comparison to an independent
state-level dataset provides a useful check, and we ﬁnd that RMA
sowing dates when aggregated to the state level correspond to weeks of
the year with between 40 and 60% area being reported as planted ac-
cording to NASS.

2.2. Satellite data

We used three representative satellite datasets in this study: (i)
Enhanced Vegetation Index (EVI) from MODIS, which represents con-
ventional approaches that rely on the visible and NIR bands (Huete
et al., 2002). EVI represents vegetation greenness and photosynthesis
potential (Sellers et al., 1992). (ii) SIF from the GOME-2, which re-
presents novel SIF measurements from the longest SIF record (2007-
present) (Joiner et al., 2013). SIF serves as a proxy of canopy-level
photosynthetic activities (van der van der Tol et al., 2014; Guan et al.,
2016). (iii) Ku-band radar backscatter data from the QuikSCAT scat-
terometer (hereafter called “Ku-dB”), representing the most widely used
radar measures of vegetation dynamics (Frolking et al., 2006, 2012;
Guan et al., 2014b). Ku-dB is used as an indicator of top-canopy water
contents and biomass (Ulaby, 1987; Vereecken et al., 2012). The spatial
and temporal scales for the three satellite products are described in
Table 1.

2.2.1. MODIS EVI

EVI and its predecessor NDVI are two widely-used datasets from the
reﬂectance-based “Vegetation Index” family based on the leaf red-edge
spectral feature in red and NIR bands. The formulation of NDVI is
(Tucker, 1979):

401

D. Urban et al.

Remote Sensing of Environment 211 (2018) 400–412

=

EVI

+

C
1

ρ

NIR

−
+

ρ
×

NIR
ρ
red

ρ
red
C
2

×

ρ

+

L

Table 1
Datasets used in this study: variable ﬁelds, temporal/spatial resolutions and
references.

Dataset

Temporal
resolution

Spatial
resolution

Temporal
coverage

MODIS EVI

16 days

(MOD13C1)

GOME-2 SIF

monthly

QuikSCAT Ku-dB

4 days

0.05°

0.5°

0.25°

2000–present

2007–present

1999–2009

NDVI

=

ρ
ρ

NIR
NIR

−
+

ρ
red
ρ
red

References

Solano et al.
(2010)
Joiner et al.
(2013)
Long and
Early (2001)

(1)

and the formulation of EVI is (Huete et al., 2002):

blue

(2)
where ρ are atmospherically corrected surface reﬂectances, L is the
canopy background adjustment addressing nonlinear radiant transfer
through a canopy for NIR and red spectra, and C1 and C2 are the
coeﬃcients to correct aerosol inﬂuences in the red band using the blue
band (Huete et al., 2002). EVI was developed to overcome problems
with saturation, alleviate atmospheric contamination in NDVI, and re-
duce the signal of bare soils (Huete et al., 2002). VIs have a quasi-linear
relationship with the fraction of photosynthetic active radiation (fPAR)
at the biome-speciﬁc level (Myneni et al., 2002), and are physically
interpreted as unstressed canopy-level photosynthesis capacity (Sellers
et al., 1992). Alternatively, VI is also interpreted as aboveground bio-
mass (Moulin et al., 1998) and correlations have been found between
some forms of VIs and LAI (Gitelson, 2003). EVI and NDVI have been
extensively used in crop phenology studies for all of the staple crops,
such as corn (Vina and Gitelson, 2004; Sakamoto et al., 2012), soybean
(Sakamoto et al., 2012), wheat (Lobell et al., 2012), and rice (Sakamoto
et al., 2006; Boschetti et al., 2009).

In this study, we used EVI from the MODIS MOD13C1 (Collection 6)
(Solano et al., 2010), which is a 16-day composite, 0.05-degree, global
product from 2000 to the present. MOD13C1 data are derived from
cloud-free composites of the gridded 16-day 1 km MOD13A2 product.
Data with only “Good” in the QA were used in this study. The 16-day
raw data were further interpolated and gap-ﬁlled using a robust
smoothing algorithm based on discrete cosine transform (DCT) (Garcia,
2010).

2.2.2. GOME-2 SIF

Solar-induced ﬂuorescence is the energy emitted from the canopy
chlorophyll during photosynthesis (Berry et al., 2013). Recent advances
in spectrometry and retrieval algorithms allow the estimation of this
variable using satellites (Guanter et al., 2010; Frankenberg et al., 2011;
Joiner et al., 2012, 2013). SIF has been found to be correlated with the
electron transport rate of photosynthesis (Zhang et al., 2014). Theore-
tically, SIF can be expressed as:
SIF

PAR fPAR LUESIF

(3)

=

×

×

where PAR refers to the photosynthetic active radiation and LUESIF is
the light use eﬃciency (LUE) of ﬂuorescence. Gross primary production
(GPP), or photosynthesis, can be expressed as
GPP

PAR fPAR LUEGPP

(4)

=

×

×

where LUESIF is the light use eﬃciency (LUE) of photosynthesis. Though
the relationship between LUESIF and LUEGPP is not always linear
(Porcar-Castell et al., 2014; van der van der Tol et al., 2014) and re-
quires
the contribution of
PAR × fPAR, SIF and GPP have been found to be linearly related at the
canopy (Zarco-Tejada et al., 2012; Rossini et al., 2015), landscape

study, when accounting for

further

(Damm et al., 2015; Rascher et al., 2015; Yang et al., 2015) and satellite
scales (Frankenberg et al., 2011; Guanter et al., 2014). Thus in theory,
SIF contains more information about vegetation photosynthetic activ-
ities than VIs, and a study that examined major eddy-covariance towers
in North America has found that SIF can better track GPP seasonality
than fPAR and ecosystem models (Joiner et al., 2014).
In this study, we used SIF retrieved near the λ = 740 nm spectral
window from the Global Ozone Monitoring Experiment-2 (GOME-2)
instrument onboard Eumetsat's MetOp-A satellite, which has been
functioning since 2007 until the present. The instrument's algorithm
(Joiner et al., 2013) disentangles three spectral components near the
peak of the far-red chlorophyll ﬂuorescence emissions feature: atmo-
spheric absorption (due to water vapor), surface reﬂectance, and
ﬂuorescence radiance. The derived GOME-2 SIF (version 26) that col-
lected data from 2007 to 2012 was used in this study. The GOME-2 SIF
has the generic footprint of ~40 × 80 km2, and it has been gridded to
0.5° and monthly resolution, with estimated errors of 0.1–0.4 mW/m2/
nm/sr (Joiner et al., 2013).

2.2.3. QuikSCAT backscatter

Radar backscattering signals are sensitive to the dialectic properties
and surface roughness of the landscape (Ulaby et al., 1990). This sen-
sitivity varies with wavelengths. For relatively short wavelengths (e.g.
X-band: 8–12 GHz, 2.5–3.8 cm; or Ku-band: 12–18 GHz, 1.7–2.5 cm)
(Vereecken et al., 2012), backscattering signals are especially sensitive
to canopy water content and biomass (Frolking et al., 2006; Saatchi
et al., 2013). With increased wavelengths (e.g. C-band: 4–8 GHz,
3.8–7.5 cm; L-band: 1–2 GHz, 15–30 cm), backscattering signals can
partially or mostly penetrate the canopy and are thus more sensitive to
shallow-layer soil moisture (Jackson, 1993). Ku-band backscattering
data, due to its strong sensitivity to canopy water content and biomass,
has been used to study vegetation dynamics and phenology in natural
ecosystems, including tropical forests (Frolking et al., 2012; Guan et al.,
2013; Saatchi et al., 2013), tropical savannas (Guan et al., 2014b),
temperate ecosystems (Frolking et al., 2005, 2006), and boreal forests
(Kimball et al., 2004). However, the use of radar data in agriculture
systems is heavily focused on classifying crop types (Mcnairn and
Brisco, 2004; Vereecken et al., 2012), and few studies have been done
to use radar data to measure crop phenology (Lopez-Sanchez et al.,
2012).

Here we used Ku-band backscattering data from the QuikSCAT
scatterometer. QuikSCAT is a Ku-band (13.4 GHz, or 2.1 cm wave-
length) active radar with two rotating pencil beam antennas operating
in H and V polarizations at incidence angles of 55.8° and 46.8°.
Originally designed for estimating ocean wind ﬁelds, QuikSCAT pro-
vides the Ku-band backscatter coeﬃcient (called “dB” hereafter) over
land. The QuikSCAT dB product combines ascending and descending
overpass together (0600 and 1800 h) for a daily composite (Long and
Early, 2001). VV polarization backscattering was used here due to its
high sensitivity to canopy water contents (Frolking et al., 2006).
QuikSCAT was launched in 1999 and operated until November 2009
due to the failure of its antenna spinning motor. Continuation of
QuikSCAT was partially achieved by the launch of RapidSCAT by NASA
that functioned from September 2014 to August 2016 (Rodriguez,
2013). The current study uses the full record of QuikSCAT dB data from
1999 to 2009.

2.3. Multiple metrics of estimating green-up (sowing dates) from satellite
data

We adopted the approach of Guan et al. (2014a) to ﬁt the annual
cycle of crop canopy seasonality with a double logistic function, which
follows a similar method as Zhang et al. (2003):

402

D. Urban et al.

Remote Sensing of Environment 211 (2018) 400–412

Fig. 1. The optimal selection of a pro-
duct and metric depends on whether
the intended use is predicting absolute
sowing dates or the interannual varia-
bility of sowing dates. Respectively, we
show measures of bias and variability
with the RMSE (x-axes) and Pearson's
correlation (y-axes) between observed
and predicted sowing dates. Each pro-
duct covers a diﬀerent span of years,
and hence has a diﬀerent level of nat-
ural variability, reﬂected in the dif-
ferent y-axis scales.

exp(

,

)

dL
1
−
b t
a
exp(
1
1
dL
2
− +
b t
a
(
2
2
⎯→⎯X

y t X
( |

⎯→⎯ = ⎧
⎨⎩

)

L
L

min

,1

min

,2

+
+

+
1
+

1

≤ ≤
t
≤ ≤
t

1

t
12

t
12
365

,

−

t

12

))

(5)

,

,

,

1

,2

,1

L

min

min

L
[

⎯→⎯ =X

the time index, and
,
2

where y refers to the model simulation of the crop canopy seasonality, t
is
the parameter vector. Here,
dL dL a b a b t
,
]
12 , where Lmin, 1 and Lmin, 2
2
refer to the states at the start and the end of a year; dL1 and dL2 refer to
the total change of canopy seasonality during the green-up and green-
oﬀ periods, respectively; a1, b1, a2, and b2 are tuning parameters ﬁt by
optimization, as is t12, the point where canopy seasonality reaches its
maximum peak. The parameter vector will satisfy the following criteria:

is
,
2

,

1

,

1

⎧⎨⎩

y t
)
(
12
L
min
,1

=
+

+
1)
=
L
min

y t
(
12
dL
1

∑=

J

n
=
i

1

⎯→⎯ −

)

y t X
( (

|

i

+

,2

dL

2

(6)

which guarantees the continuity of the canopy seasonality trajectory
during the transitional period of t12. We then deﬁned a cost function J:

d

i

2

)

(7)

where the subscript i represents the time step (here half-monthly), and
d refers to the observation of canopy seasonality (i.e. from EVI, SIF or
Ku-dB in this study). Our objective is to determine the parameter vector
that minimizes J.

The optimization is achieved by the trust-region reﬂective algorithm
(Coleman and Li, 1994). This algorithm is a subspace trust-region
method based on an interior-reﬂective Newton method with upper and
lower bounds. The convergence criteria of the algorithm takes three
factors into account: i) the maximum number of iterations (400 in this
case); ii) the termination tolerance on the function value (i.e. 1e-6); and
iii) the maximum number of preconditioned conjugate gradient itera-
tions (i.e. max(1, number of variables/2)). This algorithm has been
shown to be more robust than other algorithms (Zhang et al., 2003) due
to more constraints for the continuation of the time series (e.g. Eq. 6)
(Guan et al., 2014a). Based on the ﬁtted function, we compute the
following metrics as potential proxies for sowing date:

403

i. Tinﬂection: the inﬂection point of the ﬁrst derivative of the ﬁtted
curve for the green-up period. This metric uses the MODIS
Phenology product algorithm (Zhang, 2005).

ii. Tn, where n = 10, 20, 30, or 50%. These metrics refer to the point
on the ﬁtted curve at which n% of the green-up period's range has
been reached.

Before applying the above algorithm to the diﬀerent satellite pro-
ducts, we ﬁrst applied the county boundaries to each satellite product
to obtain county-level aggregated time series for each county. It is
worth noting that though ﬁeld-level crop type maps are available an-
nually, e.g. Cropland Data Layer in 30 m (Boryan et al., 2011), the
current satellite products that we use are too coarse in resolution
(Table 1) to extract meaningful crop-type-speciﬁc time series at the
ﬁeld level, since at the resolution of 25 km2 there is sub-pixel hetero-
geneity in crop type. In addition, since the validation data we use is
available at the county level, we also face issues of mixed pixels when
comparing satellite-derived sowing dates with the observed data. The
majority of the areas in our study region grow maize or soybean for the
summer growing season, though parts of southern Iowa, Illinois and
Indiana also contain signiﬁcant areas of natural vegetation (e.g. tem-
perate forests). We will explicitly address how maize/soybean area
fraction and natural vegetation fraction aﬀect the accuracy of sowing
date estimates using diﬀerent satellite sensor products and metrics.

3. Results

We analyzed each satellite product (dB, EVI, and SIF) and each
metric (Tinﬂection, T10, T20, T30, and T50) with respect to both the (i)
absolute diﬀerences, and (ii) R2 from ordinary least squares linear re-
gression (or adjusted R2 to account for uneven sample size) between the
observed and predicted sowing dates. The former measure represents
the bias in a given sensor-metric combination, while the latter measure
represents how well that metric captures the observed inter-annual
variability in sowing date. Both measures are important for an inter-
comparison of diﬀerent products and metrics, since success considering

D. Urban et al.

Remote Sensing of Environment 211 (2018) 400–412

one measure does not necessarily guarantee success considering the
other, and the utility of each measure depends on the intended appli-
cation.

3.1. Inter-comparison of diﬀerent sensor-metric combinations at the
regional scale

Fig. 1 shows the bias and variability between observed and pre-
dicted sowing dates for all the sensor-metric combinations. Overall, SIF
achieves the best performance (cor = 0.93) for Tinﬂection, T30 and T50,
which outperforms EVI by a signiﬁcant margin (diﬀerence of
cor = 0.15). This result conﬁrms previous ﬁndings that SIF can better
track plant growth because SIF captures photosynthetic activity rather
than color represented by EVI or other VIs (Joiner et al., 2014). Con-
sidering dB, only the T50 metric achieves a reasonable performance
(cor = 0.35) while the other metrics using dB show negative correla-
tions with observed data. This indicates that dB's time series contain
large uncertainties especially in the initial green-up stage, and it only
becomes more stable and reliable when dB passes 50% of the green-up
stage (i.e. T50). For the RMSE, we ﬁnd that Tinﬂection and T30 always
achieve the lowest RMSE, consistent across all three satellite products.
This largely indicates that these two metrics may be more suitable for
estimating the absolute values of sowing dates.

Fig. 2 further compares the all-region aggregated time series of es-
timated and observed sowing dates by showing the distributions of each
product and year's anomaly from that product's average sowing date.
We ﬁnd that biases between estimated and observed sowing date de-
pend strongly on the choice of metric, with T10 < T30 < T50

considering absolute sowing date value, and Tinﬂection having similar
sowing date ranges as T30. The T30 metric stands out as the best metric
in terms of RMSE and correlation for both SIF and EVI. While the small
intersection of years between all three products prevents a perfect
comparison across all products, we ﬁnd that the overlap between dB
and EVI shows that these two products predict roughly similar inter-
annual variability when using the T50 and T30 metric, respectively.
Comparing EVI and SIF shows much higher agreement, with little de-
pendence on metrics. Both SIF and EVI show that their estimations can
capture the inter-annual variability of observed sowing dates for dif-
ferent metrics, which is less true for dB except when using T50, which is
consistent with the ﬁnding in Fig. 1. While it may be observed that the
linear trends of predicted sowing dates in Fig. 2 often diﬀer in sign from
that of the observed, we make two important notes. First, these dif-
ferences are not statistically signiﬁcant; and the short time span for all
satellite products, especially SIF, does not allow for an appropriate
analysis of how well these products capture long-term sowing date
trends. Second, the negative trend in aggregate sowing dates is largely
due to the estimates from 2012, a year in which sowing dates were
earlier and temperatures were higher than average, which contributed
to early-biased predicted sowing dates (Fig. 7).

Fig. 3 compares the county-level distribution of sowing date
anomalies (the diﬀerences from each measure's average over its entire
timespan) between diﬀerent estimations and observation. Only the T30
metric is used as we have shown that this metric has the highest ac-
curacies at the aggregated regional scale (Fig. 2). While county-level
sowing dates show more variation in the estimated (blue) than observed
(red) values, the median values tend to fall close together. More

Fig. 2. The aggregate time series of observed (black lines) sowing dates (averaging for maize and soybean) and satellite-predicted sowing dates show striking
correlation for all metrics.

404

D. Urban et al.

Remote Sensing of Environment 211 (2018) 400–412

Fig. 3. Each boxplot represents the distribution of sowing date anomalies (the diﬀerences from each measure's average over its entire timespan) for a given product
and year, for the estimation (blue) and the RMA observation (red). The estimated sowing date is using the T30 metric for the three satellite products. (For
interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

importantly, the median estimated sowing date anomalies have the
same sign as the observed sowing dates anomalies for all years in EVI
and SIF, suggesting that aggregate estimated and observed inter-annual
variability are closely matched (Fig. 2).

3.2. Impacts of maize-soybean area ratio

We examined whether the ratio of maize to soybean at the county-
level inﬂuenced estimated sowing date accuracy. It was necessary for us
to examine the relative inﬂuence of soybean versus maize on our esti-
mation accuracies because our validation data were available at the
county-level, where maize and soybean are both planted, and all sa-
tellite products were used at coarse spatial resolutions (> 1 km) re-
sulting in mixed pixels. Furthermore, there are likely phenological
diﬀerences in maize and soybean, as maize is sown, on average, two
weeks earlier than soybean in this region, and any given satellite signal

reﬂects the green-up from both crops.

Our results show that satellite-estimated sowing dates are not sen-
sitive to variability in the ratio of maize to soybean area (Fig. 4). While
there has been a small trend toward increased maize since 2000, we see
that the correlation between county-level predicted and observed
sowing dates bears little relation to crop ratio, and that aggregate maize
and soybean sowing dates are highly correlated (R2 = 0.86) (Fig. 3).
The relative contributions of maize and soybean to the aggregate pre-
dicted sowing date do not vary signiﬁcantly across years, which re-
moves the possible confounding eﬀect of increased area under maize
through time.

3.3. How crop fraction and environmental factors explain biases and
variability in sowing date estimation

We also investigated the spatial patterns of biases and correlation

405

D. Urban et al.

Remote Sensing of Environment 211 (2018) 400–412

Fig. 4. (a) The ratio of maize to soybean has seen a slight increase in our study period with considerable variation across counties within any given year (left panel).
(b) However, regressions of observed county-level sowing dates against satellite-predicted sowing dates (y-axis) do not show signiﬁcant correlation with the maize to
soybean crop ratio (here we used the estimated sowing dates from EVI at Tinﬂection, with other products and metrics showing a similar pattern). (c) Furthermore, in
aggregate, the interannual variability of maize and soybean sowing dates are highly correlated, ensuring that our aggregated predicted sowing dates are not
confounded by year to year changes in crop ratio.

between predicted and observed sowing dates (Fig. 5) and their po-
tential causes (Fig. 6). Here again we only focus on the T30 metric for
all three satellite products. We observe large spatial heterogeneity in
estimation biases and the adjusted R2 of all three satellite products. The
county-level biases show a consistent spatial pattern across the three
satellite products, with the northern part of the three states showing
negative biases and the southern part showing positive biases. The
spatial patterns of the adjusted R2 for inter-annual variability in sowing
date show less consistent patterns across the three satellite products,
though EVI and SIF both tend to show a cluster of higher correspon-
dence between predicted and observed sowing date in central Illinois/
Indiana.

Fig. 6 further shows the spatial patterns of county-level annual
anomalies. For
the overlapping time period of EVI and SIF
(2007–2012), the T30 metric for both satellite products captured the
spatial patterns of observed anomalies. However, EVI-based sowing
dates showed a more coherent and smooth pattern compared with SIF-
based estimations, which may be mostly explained by the higher signal-
to-noise ratio in EVI and more general noise in the SIF time series, even
though regionally-aggregated sowing dates derived using SIF show si-
milar or slightly better accuracies compared to EVI based estimates. In
Fig. 6 we use the T50 metric for dB, as it has the highest R2 with ob-
served data (Fig. 1); however even so, we ﬁnd T50 of dB could not
capture the annual anomaly patterns for most years.

We next examined how much the biases and variability of our es-
timated sowing dates can be explained by crop fraction (or equivalently
natural vegetation fraction) and environmental factors (Fig. 7). For the
environmental
factors, we consider both temperature and rainfall
averaged during the sowing season for each year, deﬁned as April to
May, when nearly all sowing occurs in this region. We ﬁnd that the
biases in our estimates are strongly correlated with April and May
temperatures (Fig. 7). The temperature eﬀect can likely be attributed to
accelerated phenology with warmer temperatures, resulting in a faster
than expected green-up and hence a too-early predicted sowing date.
This pattern is consistent across the three satellite products.

We also see that areas with less crop fraction (i.e. more natural
vegetation) are associated with an earlier sowing date, and this pattern
is consistent across all three satellite products. This is expected as
natural vegetation usually greens up earlier than crops in the spring,
and this earlier green up is reﬂected in the satellite data. Inter-annual
variability in sowing date (Fig. 7c) shows a similar pattern where less
crop cover corresponds to lower correlations between estimated and
observed sowing date; however, the inﬂuence of crop cover is smaller
for correlation than it is for bias (Fig. 7b). This is particularly true for

SIF where there is almost no correlation between crop area fraction and
the inter-annual correlation. These results suggest that temperature and
relative crop cover are two important factors that contribute to bias
between our satellite estimated and observed sowing dates, and future
work should examine which, if any, other factors also contribute to
bias.

The spatial resolution of these satellite products does not allow
diﬀerentiation of crops from natural vegetation, and the inﬂuence of
this mixing as evidenced in Fig. 7 b-c warrants further explanation. To
do so, it is important to distinguish between diﬀerent measures of sow
date prediction skill. In particular, a low bias (which might be oﬀset by
a diﬀerent choice of metric, e.g. Tinﬂection vs. T30) does not ne-
cessarily imply good estimation of time trends or interannual varia-
bility, and vice versa. A time series of estimated sow dates that captures
the true temporal trend and interannual variability will have a high
Pearson correlation, even if it has a large bias. Natural vegetation can
aﬀect both at the county level, as shown in Fig. 7, but an important
question is how the diﬀering proportions of crops to natural vegetation
across counties aﬀects the aggregation from county to region. In Fig. 8
we show each satellite product's time series where the aggregation has
included all counties in the dataset, along with its counterpart where
the aggregation excludes counties where < 30% of county area is
covered by cropland. We see the respective time series absolute value is
oﬀset, but they are otherwise nearly identical in terms of temporal
trend and interannual variablity. Once this bias has been subtracted,
the diﬀerences between the time series are within ± 2 days for all years
and for all satellite products. This indicates that at the regional level,
the mix of natural vegetation with crops can have a strong impact on
the time series bias and thus the ability to predict absolute sow dates,
but does not appear to substantially aﬀect estimates of time trends and
interannual variation.

The robustness of the aggregate time trends and interannual varia-
bility to varying degrees of crop coverage throughout the region owes
largely to the fact that the spatial distribution of crop coverage did not
signiﬁcantly change during the years covered by this study. That is,
counties with a high or low percentage of crop area at the beginning of
the time period tended to stay that way. If many counties had either
added or lost crop area across these years, not only would the bias
between predicted and observed dates be aﬀected, but so too might the
estimates of time trends and interannual variability. We caution,
therefore, that temporal changes in crop area or crop mix should be
considered when assessing trends or variability of crop seasonality
using methods similar to those in this study. Finer spatial resolution
data which can diﬀerentiate diﬀerent crops and natural vegetation

406

D. Urban et al.

Remote Sensing of Environment 211 (2018) 400–412

Fig. 5. Each product covers a diﬀerent span of years, but the average crop cover (percentage of each county's area covered by soybean and maize) during each
product's timespan shows minimal variation (a). The bias (observed sowing data minus predicted sowing data) of each product (b) is correlated with crop cover,
where counties with less relative crop cover tend to predict sowing dates too early. Each product's skill in capturing interannual variability is measured by the R2 (c)
and Pearson correlation (d) between observed and predicted sowing dates.
The binning in (d) demonstrates where observed sowing date is negatively correlated with predicted sowing date, and among the counties with positive correlation
(more desirable), which have poor, moderate, good, and excellent prediction. For each product shown here, we have used the T30 metric, whose interannual
variability is similar to other metrics but that exhibits the least bias.

would largely avoid the above issue.

3.4. Integrating temperature and satellite estimation to infer linear trends
and inter-annual variability at regional scales

While strong correlation exists between observed and predicted
sowing dates for some individual counties, the large spread of corre-
lations at the county level suggests that additional, location-speciﬁc
information must be integrated with satellite measures to obtain more

consistent sowing date prediction at this spatial scale. However, the
much higher correlations we ﬁnd at the tri-state level suggest that sa-
tellite-based methods show signiﬁcant promise for estimating the
magnitude of linear trends and inter-annual variability in regional
sowing dates. This is especially important given that these methods are
most likely to be desirable in areas where local ground-based sowing
date reporting, and sometimes even local weather data, are diﬃcult to
obtain. For EVI's T30 metric, we ﬁnd an R2 of 0.57 when predicting
regional sowing date based on satellite data alone. This is improved to

407

D. Urban et al.

Remote Sensing of Environment 211 (2018) 400–412

Fig. 6. For each year and product, we show each county's yearly anomaly, deﬁned as the diﬀerence between the year's sowing dates and the average sowing dates
over each product's respective timespan. Comparing each product's anomalies of estimated sowing dates with the observed (rightmost column) gives the indication of
how well each product's spatial pattern of interannual variability matches the spatial pattern of observed variability. The respective metrics shown for dB, EVI, and
SIF are T50, T30, and T30, which are selected for their balance of bias and variability (see Fig. 2).

408

D. Urban et al.

Remote Sensing of Environment 211 (2018) 400–412

Fig. 7. We ﬁnd that average diﬀerences between observed and predicted sowing dates are inﬂuenced both by average sowing-season temperature (top panel) and
crop cover (center panel). County-level interannual variability is more robust, however, showing weaker dependence on crop cover, especially when using SIF
(bottom panel), and nearly zero dependence on sowing-season temperature (not shown).

0.71 when the maize to soybean ratio is added to the model, and to 0.78
when adding the average temperature during planting months (April
and May, in this study).

4. Discussion

Sowing date information is critical for crop modeling and yield es-
timation, but spatially-explicit sowing date information is lacking even
in developed countries, such as the US Midwest, which produces about
45% of global maize and 30% of global soybean production. In this
study, we provide a systematic assessment using multiple satellite
products and diﬀerent retrieval metrics to estimate crop sowing date at
the county level for the three major states (Illinois, Indiana, and Iowa)
in the US Midwest that have a dominant landscape of maize and soy-
bean. We use sowing dates aggregated to the county level from the
randomly sampled RMA ﬁeld-level data to validate our remote sensing
estimates of sowing date.

Our results suggest that the three satellite products (EVI, SIF and Ku-
dB) have variable abilities to capture inter-annual variability of sowing
dates at county or regionally aggregated levels. Both EVI- and SIF-based

estimations of sowing dates using T30 and Tinﬂection achieve very high
accuracies (adjusted R2 > 0.75, RMSE < 10 days), while dB-based es-
timates have much lower accuracies. In general SIF-based estimates
outperform EVI-based estimates, particularly at the regional scale
(Figs. 1 & 2). This is likely because SIF captures actual photosynthetic
activity (Joiner et al., 2014) as opposed to only color as seen by VIs like
EVI (Berry et al., 2013; Porcar-Castell et al., 2014). However, we also
ﬁnd that SIF contains more noise at the county level compared to EVI
(Figs. 5 and Fig. 6), which leads to lower accuracies through time than
EVI at ﬁner spatial scales. The higher level of noise in SIF is primarily
due to the sensor's low sampling frequency and coarse spatial resolu-
tion, which will be improved on with new satellite missions, such as
TROPOMI (Guanter et al., 2015), FLEX (Rascher et al., 2008), and OCO-
2/-3 (Frankenberg et al., 2014).

Regarding the diﬀerent metrics considered in our study, i.e. the
inﬂection method and the threshold approach, we ﬁnd that
the
threshold approach at 30% had the highest accuracies across data
products and measures of accuracy (adjusted R2, RMSE, and correlation
of anomalies through time). We also ﬁnd that for sowing date estimates
derived using dB, the T50 approach was the most accurate. This is likely

409

D. Urban et al.

Remote Sensing of Environment 211 (2018) 400–412

satellite-predicted

Fig. 8. Two time series of regionally
aggregated
sow
dates (T30 metric) are shown: one in
which all counties are included (red),
and one in which counties with < 70%
crop area have been removed (blue).
The counties with lower crop area
clearly bias the all-counties aggrega-
tion downward, but the time series re-
main otherwise similar.
inter-
pretation of the references to color in
this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred
to the web version of this article.)

(For

because the dB time series contain large uncertainties in the initial
green-up stage and only becomes more stable when dB passes 50% of
the green-up stage.

We examined the inﬂuence of multiple potential confounding fac-
tors on the accuracies of our sowing date estimates. When considering
the relative area in a county planted under maize and soybean, we ﬁnd
that there is high inter-annual correlation between maize and soybean
(Fig. 4c), and the maize-soybean ratio is not associated with bias in our
sowing date estimates (Fig. 4b). However, we do ﬁnd that crop fraction
(i.e. natural vegetation fraction) and sowing period temperature have
signiﬁcant impacts on estimated sowing dates (Fig. 7). Speciﬁcally, an
increased fraction of natural vegetation in a pixel leads to an earlier
estimated sowing date from the satellite data compared to observed
data, likely due to the early green-up of natural vegetation compared to
crop cover in the spring. Higher sowing-period temperature leads to a
later estimated sowing date compared to observed data, and this is
because warmer temperatures speed up emergence. Future work may
be able to reduce the confounding eﬀects of mixed pixels by using ﬁner
spatial
(30 m) and Sentinel-2
(10–20 m), likely allowing for ﬁeld-level accuracy. We ﬁnd that in-
corporating crop area fraction and sowing-period temperature in our
model that estimates sowing date using satellite data leads to the
highest accuracies, with better R2 and lower RMSE than any of the
models that use only satellite data to estimate sowing date.

such as Landsat

resolution data,

5. Conclusion

Overall our study ﬁnds that satellite measures can capture sowing
date variation in both space and time, with varying degrees of accuracy
for diﬀerent satellites, metrics, and spatial scales (e.g. county vs. re-
gion). We generally ﬁnd poor performance for the dB product, but
promising results from both EVI and SIF. SIF produces more counties
where correlation with oberved sowing date exceeds 0.8 than does EVI
(57 vs. 17 counties, respectively). However, SIF's performance is also
more variable, as it produes fewer counties than EVI with correlations
between 0.3 and 0.8 (144 vs. 190 counties), and more counties with

410

negative correlations (32 vs. 16). These products successfully capture
aggregate time trends and interannual variability at the regional level,
though their success is mixed at the county level, where county-speciﬁc
factors such as natural vegetation to crop ratio can aﬀect both the bias
and ability to capture trends and internnual variability. While SIF ex-
hibits less sensitivity to natural vegetation than EVI, its time series is
too short to adequately assess whether it truly outperforms EVI. At both
county and regional scales, removing biases to predict absolute sow
dates is possible by careful choice of metric (in this study, T30 did the
best), but highly sensitive to spring temperature and crop to natural
vegetation ratio, and thus not likely to extrapolate to new data. We
therefore see identifying regional aggregate trends and variability as
the most likely use case for this approach.

Acknowledgements

K.G. acknowledges the supports from the NASA New Investigator
Award (NNX16AI56G) and NASA Carbon Monitoring System Award
(80NSSC18K0170). M.J. acknowledges support
from the National
Science Foundation SEES Postdoctoral Fellowship (1415436) and the
NASA New Investigator Award (NNH15ZDA001N).

References

Barraclough, P.B., Leigh, R.A., 1984. The growth and activity of winter wheat roots in the
ﬁeld: the eﬀect of sowing date and soil type on root growth of high-yielding crops. J.
Agric. Sci. 103, 59.

Berry, J.A., Frankenberg, C., Wennberg, P., 2013. New Methods for Measurements of

Photosynthesis from Space (Report of Keck Institute for Space Studies).

Boryan, C., Yang, Z., Mueller, R., Craig, M., 2011. Monitoring US agriculture: the US
Department of Agriculture, National Agricultural Statistics Service, Cropland Data
Layer Program. Geochem. Int. 26, 341–358.

Boschetti, M., Stroppiana, D., Brivio, P.A., Bocchi, S., 2009. Multi-year monitoring of rice
crop phenology through time series analysis of MODIS images. Int. J. Remote Sens.
30, 4643–4662.

Cirilo, A.G., Andrade, F.H., 1996. Sowing date and kernel weight in maize. Crop Sci. 36,

325–331.

Coleman, T.F., Li, Y., 1994. On the convergence of interior-reﬂective Newton methods for

nonlinear minimization subject to bounds. Math. Program. 67, 189–224.

Damm, A., Guanter, L., Paul-Limoges, E., et al., 2015. Far-red sun-induced chlorophyll

D. Urban et al.

Remote Sensing of Environment 211 (2018) 400–412

ﬂuorescence shows ecosystem-speciﬁc relationships to gross primary production: an
assessment based on observational and modeling approaches. Remote Sens. Environ.
166, 91–105.

Farooq, M., Bramley, H., Palta, J.A., Siddique, K.H.M., 2011. Heat stress in wheat during

reproductive and grain-ﬁlling phases. Crit. Rev. Plant Sci. 30, 491–507.

Frankenberg, C., Fisher, J.B., Worden, J., et al., 2011. New global observations of the
terrestrial carbon cycle from GOSAT: patterns of plant ﬂuorescence with gross pri-
mary productivity. Geophys. Res. Lett. 38.

Frankenberg, C., O'Dell, C., Berry, J., et al., 2014. Prospects for chlorophyll ﬂuorescence
remote sensing from the orbiting carbon observatory-2. Remote Sens. Environ. 147,
1–12.

Frolking, S., Fahnestock, M., Milliman, T., McDonald, K., Kimball, J., 2005. Interannual
variability in North American grassland biomass/productivity detected by SeaWinds
scatterometer backscatter. Geophys. Res. Lett. 32, L21409.

Frolking, S., Milliman, T., McDonald, K., Kimball, J., Zhao, M., Fahnestock, M., 2006.

Evaluation of the sea winds scatterometer for regional monitoring of vegetation
phenology. J. Geophys. Res.-Atmos. 111, D17302.

Frolking, S., Hagen, S., Milliman, T., Palace, M., Shimbo, J.Z., Fahnestock, M., 2012.

Detection of large-scale forest canopy change in pan-tropical humid forests
2000–2009 with the seawinds Ku-band scatterometer. IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens. 50, 2603–2617.

Galford, G.L., Mustard, J.F., Melillo, J., Gendrin, A., Cerri, C.C., Cerri, C.E.P., 2008.

Wavelet analysis of MODIS time series to detect expansion and intensiﬁcation of row-
crop agriculture in Brazil. Remote Sens. Environ. 112, 576–587.

Garcia, D., 2010. Robust smoothing of gridded data in one and higher dimensions with

missing values. Comput. Stat. Data Anal. 54, 1167–1178.

Gitelson, A.A., 2003. Remote estimation of leaf area index and green leaf biomass in

maize canopies. Geophys. Res. Lett. 30, 1248.

Guan, K., Wolf, A., Medvigy, D., Caylor, K., Pan, M., Wood, E.F., 2013. Seasonal coupling

of canopy structure and function in African tropical forests and its environmental
controls. Ecosphere 4, 1–21.

Guan, K., Medvigy, D., Wood, E.F., Caylor, K.K., Li, S., Jeong, S., 2014a. Deriving vege-
tation Phenological time and trajectory information over Africa using SEVIRI daily
LAI. IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. 52, 1113–1130.

Guan, K., Wood, E.F., Medvigy, D., et al., 2014b. Terrestrial hydrological controls on land
surface phenology of African savannas and woodlands. J. Geophys. Res. Biogeosci.
119, 1652–1669.

Guan, K., Berry, J.A., Zhang, Y., Joiner, J., Guanter, L., Badgley, G., Lobell, D.B., 2016.

Improving the monitoring of crop productivity using spaceborne solar-induced
ﬂuorescence. Glob. Chang. Biol. 22, 716–726.

Guan, K., Wu, J., Kimball, J.S., et al., 2017. The shared and unique values of optical,
ﬂuorescence, thermal and microwave satellite data for estimating large-scale crop
yields. Remote Sens. Environ. 199, 333–349.

Guanter, L., Alonso, L., Gómez-Chova, L., Meroni, M., Preusker, R., Fischer, J., Moreno, J.,
2010. Developments for vegetation ﬂuorescence retrieval from spaceborne high-re-
solution spectrometry in the O 2 -A and O 2 -B absorption bands. J. Geophys. Res.
115, D19303.

Guanter, L., Zhang, Y., Jung, M., et al., 2014. Global and time-resolved monitoring of crop

photosynthesis with chlorophyll ﬂuorescence. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 111,
E1327–E1333.

Guanter, L., Aben, I., Tol, P., et al., 2015. Potential of the TROPOspheric monitoring

instrument (TROPOMI) onboard the Sentinel-5 precursor for the monitoring of ter-
restrial chlorophyll ﬂuorescence. Atmos. Meas. Tech. 8, 1337–1352.

Huete, A., Didan, K., Miura, T., Rodriguez, E.P., Gao, X., Ferreira, L.G., 2002. Overview of

the radiometric and biophysical performance of the MODIS vegetation indices.
Remote Sens. Environ. 83, 195–213.

Irwin, S., Good, D., Newton, J., 2015. Early planting and 2015 corn yield prospects: How

Much of an Increase? In: Farmdoc Daily. 93.

Jackson, T.J., 1993. Microwave remote sensing. Hydrol. Process. 7, 139–152.
Jain, M., Singh, Balwinder, Srivastava, A.K., Malik, R.K., McDonald, A.J., Lobell, D.B.,
2017. Using satellite data to identify the causes of and potential solutions for yield
gaps in India's Wheat Belt. Environ. Res. Lett. 12 094011.

Joiner, J., Yoshida, Y., Vasilkov, A.P., Middleton, E.M., Campbell, P.K.E., Kuze, A., L A,
Corp, 2012. Filling-in of near-infrared solar lines by terrestrial ﬂuorescence and other
geophysical eﬀects: simulations and space-based observations from SCIAMACHY and
GOSAT. Atmos. Meas. Tech. 5, 809–829.

Joiner, J., Guanter, L., Lindstrot, R., et al., 2013. Global monitoring of terrestrial chlor-

ophyll ﬂuorescence from moderate spectral resolution near-infrared satellite mea-
surements: methodology, simulations, and application to GOME-2. Atmos. Meas.
Tech. 6, 2803–2823.

Joiner, J., Yoshida, Y., Vasilkov, a.P., et al., 2014. The seasonal cycle of satellite chlor-
ophyll ﬂuorescence observations and its relationship to vegetation phenology and
ecosystem atmosphere carbon exchange. Remote Sens. Environ. 152, 375–391.

Jones, M.O., Jones, L.A., Kimball, J.S., McDonald, K.C., 2011. Satellite passive microwave
remote sensing for monitoring global land surface phenology. Remote Sens. Environ.
115, 1102–1114.

Kimball, J.S., McDonald, K.C., Running, S.W., Frolking, S.E., 2004. Satellite radar remote

sensing of seasonal growing seasons for boreal and subalpine evergreen forests.
Remote Sens. Environ. 90, 243–258.

Lansigan, F.P., De Los Santos, W.L., Coladilla, J.O., 2000. Agronomic impacts of climate

variability on rice production in the Philippines. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 82,
129–137.

Lobell, D.B., Ortiz-Monasterio, J.I., 2007. Impacts of day versus night temperatures on

spring wheat yields. Agron. J. 99, 469.

Lobell, D.B., Cassman, K.G., Field, C.B., 2009. Crop yield gaps: their importance, mag-

nitudes, and causes. Annu. Rev. Environ. Resour. 34, 179–204.

Lobell, D.B., Sibley, A., Ivan Ortiz-Monasterio, J., 2012. Extreme heat eﬀects on wheat

senescence in India. Nat. Clim. Chang. 2, 186–189.

Lobell, D.B., Roberts, M.J., Schlenker, W., Braun, N., Little, B.B., Rejesus, R.M., Hammer,

G.L., 2014. Greater sensitivity to drought accompanies maize yield increase in the
U.S. Midwest. Science 344, 516–519 (New York, N.Y.).

Long, D.G., Early, D.S., 2001. Image reconstruction and enhanced resolution imaging

from irregular samples image reconstruction and enhanced resolution imaging from
irregular samples. In: IEEE Geoscience and Geoscience and Remote Sensing. 39. pp.
291–302.

Lopez-Sanchez, J.M., Member, S., Cloude, S.R., Ballester-berman, J.D., 2012. Rice

Phenology Monitoring by Means of SAR Polarimetry at X-Band. 50. pp. 2695–2709.
Mcnairn, H., Brisco, B., 2004. The application of C-band polarimetric SAR for agriculture:

a review. Can. J. Remote. Sens. 30, 525–542.

Moulin, S., Bondeau, A., Delecolle, R., 1998. Combining agricultural crop models and

satellite observations: from ﬁeld to regional scales. Int. J. Remote Sens. 19,
1021–1037.

Myneni, R.B., Hoﬀman, S., Knyazikhin, Y., et al., 2002. Global products of vegetation leaf
area and fraction absorbed PAR from year one of MODIS data. Remote Sens. Environ.
83, 214–231.

Nafziger, E., 2015. Now is best time to plant. In: The Bulletin of Pest Management and

Crop Developement Information in Illinois.

Ortiz-Monasterio, R.J.I., Dhillon, S.S., Fischer, R.A., 1994. Date of sowing eﬀects on grain
yield and yield components of irrigated spring wheat cultivars and relationships with
radiation and temperature in Ludhiana, India. Field Crop Res. 37, 169–184.

Otegui, E., Nicolini, G., R A, Ruiz, P A, Dodds, 1995. Sowing date eﬀects on grain yield

components for diﬀerent maize genotypes. Agron. J. 87, 29–33.

Porcar-Castell, A., Tyystjärvi, E., Atherton, J., et al., 2014. Linking chlorophyll a ﬂuor-

escence to photosynthesis for remote sensing applications: mechanisms and chal-
lenges. J. Exp. Bot. 65, 4065–4095.

Rascher, U., Gioli, B., Miglietta, F., 2008. FLEX—ﬂuorescence explorer: a remote sensing

approach to quantify spatio-temporal variations of photosynthetic eﬃciency from
space. In: Allen, J.F., Gantt, E., Golbeck, J.H., Osmond, B. (Eds.), Photosynthesis.
Energy from the Sun: 14th International Congress on Photosynthesis, pp. 1387–1390.
Rascher, U., Alonso, L., Burkart, A., et al., 2014. Sun-induced ﬂuorescence - a new probe
of photosynthesis: First maps from the imaging spectrometer HyPlant. Glob. Chang.
Biol. 21 (12), 4673–4684.

Reynolds, M., Balota, M., Delgado, M.I.B., Amani, I., Fischer, R.A., 1994. Physiological

and morphological traits associated with spring wheat yield under hot, irrigated
conditions. Aust. J. Plant Physiol. 21, 717–730.

Rodriguez, E., 2013. The NASA ISS-RapidScat Mission. In: American Geophysical Union,

Fall Meeting 2013.

Rossini, M., Nedbal, L., Guanter, L., et al., 2015. Red and far red {Sun}-induced chlor-

ophyll ﬂuorescence as a measure of plant photosynthesis. Geophys. Res. Lett. 42
2014GL062943.

Saatchi, S., Aseﬁ-Najafabady, S., Malhi, Y., Aragão, L.E.O.C., Anderson, L.O., Myneni,
R.B., Nemani, R., 2013. Persistent eﬀects of a severe drought on Amazonian forest
canopy. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America. 110. pp. 565–570.

Sakamoto, T., Yokozawa, M., Toritani, H., Shibayama, M., Ishitsuka, N., Ohno, H., 2005.

A crop phenology detection method using time-series MODIS data. Remote Sens.
Environ. 96, 366–374.

Sakamoto, T., Van Nguyen, N., Ohno, H., Ishitsuka, N., Yokozawa, M., 2006.

Spatio–temporal distribution of rice phenology and cropping systems in the Mekong
Delta with special reference to the seasonal water ﬂow of the Mekong and Bassac
rivers. Remote Sens. Environ. 100, 1–16.

Sakamoto, T., Gitelson, A.A., Nguy-Robertson, A.L., et al., 2012. An alternative method
using digital cameras for continuous monitoring of crop status. Agric. For. Meteorol.
154–155, 113–126.

Sellers, P.J., Berry, J.A., Collatz, G.J., Field, C.B., Hall, E.G., 1992. Canopy reﬂectance,
photosynthesis, and transpiration. III. A reanalysis using improved leaf models and a
new canopy integration scheme. Remote Sens. Environ. 42, 187–216.

Solano, R., Didan, K., Jacobson, A., Huete, A., 2010. MODIS Vegetation Index User's

Guide (MOD13 Series).

van der Tol, C., Berry, J.A., Campbell, P.K.E., Rascher, U., 2014. Models of ﬂuorescence

and photosynthesis for interpreting measurements of solar-induced chlorophyll
ﬂuorescence. J. Geophys. Res. Biogeosci. 119 (12), 2312–2327.

Tucker, C.J., 1979. Red and photographic infrared linear combinations for monitoring

vegetation. Remote Sens. Environ. 8, 127–150.

Ulaby, F.T., 1987. Dielectric Spectrum of Vegetation Part II: Dual-Dispersion Model. pp.

550–557.

Ulaby, F.T., Sarabandi, K., McDONALD, K., Whitt, M., Dobson, M.C., 1990. Michigan

microwave canopy scattering model. Int. J. Remote Sens. 11, 1223–1253.

Vereecken, H., Weihermüller, L., Jonard, F., Montzka, C., 2012. Characterization of crop

canopies and water stress related phenomena using microwave remote sensing
methods: a review. Vadose Zone J. 11.

Vina, A., Gitelson, A., 2004. Monitoring maize (Zea mays L.) phenology with remote

sensing. Agric. J. 1147, 1139–1147.

Wardlow, B.D., Kastens, J.H., Egbert, S.L., 2006. Using USDA crop progress data for the

evaluation of Greenup onset date calculated from MODIS 250-meter data.
Photogramm. Eng. Remote. Sens. 72, 1225–1234.

White, M.A., de Beurs, K.M., Didan, K., et al., 2009. Intercomparison, interpretation, and
assessment of spring phenology in North America estimated from remote sensing for
1982–2006. Glob. Chang. Biol. 15, 2335–2359.

Yang, X., Tang, J., Mustard, J.F., et al., 2015. Solar-induced chlorophyll ﬂuorescence that
correlates with canopy photosynthesis on diurnal and seasonal scales in a temperate
deciduous forest. Geophys. Res. Lett. 42, 2977–2987.

411

D. Urban et al.

Remote Sensing of Environment 211 (2018) 400–412

Zarco-Tejada, P.J., González-Dugo, V., Berni, J.A.J., 2012. Fluorescence, temperature and
narrow-band indices acquired from a UAV platform for water stress detection using a
micro-hyperspectral imager and a thermal camera. Remote Sens. Environ. 117,
322–337.

Zhang, X., 2005. Monitoring the response of vegetation phenology to precipitation in

Africa by coupling MODIS and TRMM instruments. J. Geophys. Res. 110 (D12103).

Zhang, X., Friedl, M.A., Schaaf, C.B., Strahler, A.H., Hodges, J.C.F., Gao, F., Reed, B.C.,

Huete, A., 2003. Monitoring vegetation phenology using MODIS. Remote Sens.
Environ. 84, 471–475.

Zhang, Y., Guanter, L., Berry, J.A., et al., 2014. Estimation of vegetation photosynthetic
capacity from space-based measurements of chlorophyll ﬂuorescence for terrestrial
biosphere models. Glob. Chang. Biol. 20, 3727–3742.

412

