978-1-4799-1114-1/13/$31.00 ©2013 IEEE

3281

IGARSS 2013

MAPPING THE PLANTING DATES: AN EFFORT TO RETRIVE CROP PHENOLOGY INFORMATION FROM MODIS NDVI TIME SERIES IN AFRICA  Zhe Guo  International Food Policy Research Institute  ABSTRACT  Obtaining a better understanding of the regional variation in local crop calendars; including the number of cropping seasons per year, and the planting and harvesting dates of specific crops, is important to a large number of organizations and individuals who are concerned with production, marketing, processing and trade of food and feed products. It is important to seed and input suppliers, for example, since these resources must be available to farmers in sufficient quantities, at the right time and in the right location. Furthermore, as crop growth models are increasingly used to explore the likely effects of different input and management interventions on crop yield, a scarce item of required input data is an estimate of the specific planting windows that best reflect local farming practices. Despite the importance of such information, there are limited sources of such data in a regional and global context. The situation is even worse in developing country, especially in Africa. The objective of this study is to evaluate various existing crop calendar data products and to design a strategy to geo-reference and harmonize the best of them using spatial extensions. Existing datasets are digitized and geo-referenced using ArcGIS tools. Spatial analysis is applied to disaggregate and examine the relationships among different data sources, and crop Cropping Calendars (assembled in part by use of remotely sensed data products) are finally generated at a pixel scale for sub-Saharan Africa.  Index Terms— Crop Calendar, MODIS, Time series, Remote sensing, GIS  1. INTRODUCTION  Obtaining a better understanding of the regional variation in local crop calendars; including the number of cropping seasons per year, and the planting and harvesting dates of specific crops, is important to a large number of organizations and individuals who are concerned with production, marketing, processing and trade of food and feed products. It is important to seed and input suppliers, for example, since these resources must be available to farmers in sufficient quantities, at the right time and in the right location. Furthermore, as crop growth models are increasingly used to explore the likely effects of different input and management interventions on crop yield, a scarce item of required input data is an estimate of the specific planting windows that best reflect local farming practices. Despite the importance of such information, there are limited sources of such data in a regional and global context. The situation is even worse in developing country, especially in Africa.   The traditional way to collect the crop phenology related information is from national census, household survey, and experts’ interpretation of cropping systems or agro-ecological zones maps. They are usually very descriptive and have a coarse resolution in terms of spatial unit and temporal measurement, for example, Both USGS and USDA provide detailed crop calendar information in tabular or chart format at subnational level on a country basis. In the table of Chart, the suggested planting week are provided to the farmers. On the other side, crop calendars derived from this channel have a relative higher reliability. Also they are crop specific with some of them providing the crop calendar to different varieties. Developing crop calendar in this format is also very time consuming and labor intensive which make them very hard to be duplicated or generate a time series of crop calendar products.    In recent years, the GIS and remote sensing technology are growing rapidly. The spatial resolution of the satellite imageries improved dramatically. It is now common to see imageries at global scale with 3282

spatial resolution ranged from 30 meter to one or a couple of kilometers. Meanwhile, the visit frequency to the same spot are higher with many of them have a daily visit at the same location which is crucial to agriculture studies. More importantly, most of these datasets are free to the public. The availability of high spatial and temporal resolution imageries allow researchers to develop methods to generate plant phenology related products such as starting date of the growing season, end date of growing season, plant intensity , and length of the growing season using remotely sensed data. Over the decades, crop phenology related products are derived using vegetation index products from AVHRR, MODIS, and SPOT VEG by various group.   2. METHODOLOGY AND RESULTS  The MODIS 16 date composite dataset at 1km resolution from 2001 to 2012 are used in the analysis. The NDVI time series are first download from NASA MODIS data gateway and then being processed and mosaic to cover Sub-Sahara Africa. Meanwhile, the corresponding ancillary quality data layers are also being processed in the same way as the NDVI datasets. The average of NDVI values from 2001 and 2012 are displayed in Figure 1.  The TIMESAT software is used to explore and extract seasonality parameters from MODIS time series NDVI datasets including the starting date, ending dates, and the length of the growth period et al. Firstly, the ancillary quality data is used to assign weights to each of the observations at pixel level. The reliability summary QA layers from the 1km 16 days composite NDVI dataset are used. The quality and reliability of the pixels falls into four classes besides the filled value which is -1. This layer contains ranked values describing overall pixel quality. Value 0, 1, 2, 3 are representing good data, marginal data, snow/ice covered, and cloudy data correspondingly. In order to following the conventional definition in the TIMESAT software, the quality layer is reclassified from 0 to 1. The cloud pixels and ice/snow covered pixels are assigned to value 0 and all the pixels with good observation are assigned value 1. Values ranging from 0 to 1 in the time series associated with the observation quality (e.g. cloudy, mixed, and clear) will be used to assign different weights. The most cloud contaminated observation at pixel level will be assign    Figure 1. Long-term NDVI average (2001-2012) in Africa  0 which indicate that they will not influence the subsequent fitting. All the marginal pixels will be assigned weights of 0.5. The pixels with good quality will be assigned value 1. Secondly, A curve fitting methods are applied to eliminate clouds or snow effects to the NDVI observations in the time series profiles. Three filters are provided in the TIMESAT package: Gaussian, Logistic and Savitzky-Golay. The Adaptive Savitzky-Golay filtering is applied after evaluation the three methods in order to smoothing data and suppressing disturbances. The results are expected to have a smoothed curve adapted to the upper envelope of the NDVI values in the time-series. The Figure 2 displays the curve of NDVI observations with and without fitted functions. A set of parameters are decided based on the preliminary results from the testing runs. Both single and double seasons are allowed in the profile analysis. Meanwhile iterations of the No. of envelope are set to 3 in order to get the best fitted to the NDVI values. The width of the window of the Savitzky-Golay fitting is set to 3 and the starting of the season is defined as the place when the NDVI value meets the 10% of the seasonal amplitude. The end of the season is defined as the NDVI value meets the 30% of the seasonal amplitude on the right of the peak.  3283

    Time Figure 2 the original NDVI observations (blue line) and the fitted value (Brown line). The Brown dots represent the starting and ending dates of the profile.  The last step is to extract the seasonality parameters. There are many information can be derived from TIIMESAT including start and end of the season, maximum of the season in each individual year. The key information is the start of the season, the end of the season, and the length of growth period, respectively. The starting date, ending date of individual year from 2001 and 2012 will then be recorded and the ten-year average of them will be calculated afterwards. The results of the crop starting date are displayed in Figure 3.    Even though vegetation index such as NDVI, EVI, and LAI have been widely used in derived vegetation phenology. The accuracy and reliability is highly limited by the availability of cloud free imageries during growing season as well as spatial and temporal resolution of the datasets. Also, a reliable land cover map would be also helpful to identify the cropland extent in the process of the crop calendar process especially in Africa where farm land parcels per household are usually less than 2 ha in average. The identify phenology information at 1 km pixel are usually considered as the mixed information of land cover types in the pixels for example shrubs, grassland, cropland, forested. On the other hand, detailed crop phenology information is being collected by household surveys and census data. Depending on the countries, the household survey and census data are being collected in every couple of years. FAO have developed a crop calendar tool to harmonized and integrate crop calendar information from individual countries and a standard crop calendar    Figure 3. The Starting date of the first season  database has been made accessible to the public at continental level. The crop calendar provides information for more than 130 crops, located in 283 agro-ecological zones or districts of 44 countries which covers most of the countries in SSA. Even though the spatial resolution is not high comparing to that of the spatial data derived from remotely sensed data, the crop calendar tool provide very detailed crop calendar information to individual crops and varieties. Unfortunately, this extensive information is in tabular format at this moment and the spatial components are missed. It is very hard to use this dataset and integrate with pixellized phenology information that derived from NDVI. The efforts have been made to geo-reference tabular database in this study.  The descriptive crop related information is linked with either agro-ecological zones from the country or subnational admin units. The disaggregated crop calendar map at agro-ecological zones or subnational units are then linked and overlay with phenology results from MODIS NDVI time series. The statistical analysis and attributes are then further developed in order to capture the spatial distribution patterns of the pixel results within the agro-ecological zones or subnational units. Information such as mean, max, min, and standard deviation are calculated and associated with each individual unit in the FAO crop calendar tool. The comparisons between them are 3284

further investigated to explain the similarity or discrepancy.  3. DISSCUSSION  Even though vegetation index such as NDVI, EVI, and LAI have been widely used in derived vegetation phenology. The accuracy and reliability is highly limited by the availability of cloud free imageries during growing season as well as spatial and temporal resolution of the datasets. Also, a reliable land cover map would be also helpful to identify the cropland extent in the process of the crop calendar process especially in Africa where farm land parcels per household are usually less than 2 ha in average. The identify phenology information at 1 km pixel are usually considered as the mixed information of land cover types in the pixels for example shrubs, grassland, cropland, forested.   The curve fitting procedure is necessary step to remove cloud effects in the NDVI time series analysis. It is successfully applied in the crop phenology detection processes. The starting date of the vegetation growth in Africa is being retrieved in most of the area. One problem area is in the coastal area in Western Africa which has the cloud coverage in most of the time during the growing season. It’s almost impossible to find a cloud free image in three composite periods. In reality, the length of the growth period of most of the crops lies in about three month which is roughly six composite periods in a row. As reflected on the figure 2, the retrieval of phenology information has not succeeded in the region since the acquisition of cloudy free imagery is not long enough. The proposed solution in the next step is to investigate the possibility of using SPOT Veg NDVI imagery as a supplement remotely sensed data source. Together with MODIS observation, maybe enough observation could be collected at pixel level.    Meanwhile, crop calendars can be developed in two ways. The traditional way relies on household survey, country census, and agriculture experts. The products are usually associated with either agriculture zones or subnational units. On the other hand, many methods have been developed in using time series vegetation index to explore and extract plant phenology attributes. The products usually have a higher spatial resolution but lack of crop type information. Depending on the area, the accuracy and reliability of the estimation could vary largely. The next step of the study is aim to evaluate crop calendar data products derived from both ways and to design a strategy to geo-reference and harmonize the best of them using spatial extensions. By combining both remote sensing phenology information and geo-referenced tabulation information, the quality of crop calendar product could be improved.  4. REFERENCES  [1] Eklundh, L. and Jönsson, P., 2011, Timesat 3.1 Software Manual, Lund University, Sweden. 6Jönsson, P. and Eklundh, L., 2002, Seasonality extraction and noise removal by function ﬁtting to time-series of satellite sensor data, IEEE Transactions of Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 40, No 8, 1824 – 1832.  [2] Huete A, Didan K, Miura T, Rodriguez EP, Gao X, Ferreira LG 2002. Overview of the radiometric and biophysical performance of the MODIS vegetation indices, Remote Sensing of Environment. 83 (1-2): 195-213.   [3] Jönsson, P. and Eklundh, L., 2004, Timesat - a program for analyzing time-series of satellite sensor data, Computers and Geosciences, 30, 833 – 845  [4] Schaaf CB, Gao F, Strahler AH, Lucht W, Li XW, Tsang T, Strugnell NC, Zhang XY, Jin YF, Muller JP, Lewis P, Barnsley M, Hobson P, Disney M, Roberts G, Dunderdale M, Doll C, d'Entremont RP, Hu BX, Liang SL, Privette JL, Roy D. 2002 First operational BRDF, albedo nadir reflectance products from MODIS. Remote Sensing of Environment, 83 (12): 135-148.   [5] Scheiter, S.; Higgins, S.I. Impacts of climate change on the vegetation of Africa: an adaptive dynamic vegetation modelling approach. Global Change Biology 2009, 15, 2224-2246.  [6] Wessels, K.; Steenkamp, K.; von Maltitz, G.; Archibald, S. Remotely sensed vegetation phenology for describing and predicting the biomes of South Africa. Applied Vegetation Science 2011, 14, 49-66.  [7] Zhang XY, Friedl MA, Schaaf CB, Strahler AH, Hodges JCF, Gao F, Reed BC, Huete A 2003. Monitoring vegetation phenology using MODIS. Remote Sensing of Environment. 84 (3): 471-475  