Agricultural Systems 168 (2019) 131–143

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Agricultural Systems

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/agsy

Shifting planting date of Boro rice as a climate change adaptation strategy to
reduce water use
Tapos Kumar Acharjeea,c,⁎, Gerardo van Halsemab, Fulco Ludwiga, Petra Hellegersb, Iwan Supita

T

a Water Systems and Global Change Group, Wageningen University, Wageningen, The Netherlands
b Water Resources Management Group, Wageningen University, Wageningen, The Netherlands
c Department of Irrigation and Water Management, Bangladesh Agricultural University, Mymensingh, Bangladesh

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Transplanting date
Water demand
CropWat
Heat stress
Bangladesh

Suitable adaptation strategies for dry season Boro rice cultivation under future climate change scenarios are
important for future food security in Bangladesh. This study assessed the eﬀect of shifting trans−/planting date
of dry season Boro rice as an adaptation strategy, with focus on water requirements under future climate sce-
narios. Potential crop water requirement, eﬀective rainfall and irrigation requirement to satisfy crop evapo-
transpiration of Boro rice were estimated using CropWat 8.0 for early, normal and late planting dates for 2050s
and 2080s. Future climate scenarios were constructed using ﬁve global circulation model (GCM) outputs for RCP
4.5 and 8.5 by statistical downscaling and bias correction. Number of days exceeding the threshold temperatures
(maximum of 35 °C and minimum of 25 °C) was counted for critical period of Boro rice to understand com-
patibility of the changed planting dates. Results indicate that late planting can substantially reduce irrigation
demand by increasing rainfall availability during Boro growth duration, but the option is very limited due to
both day- and night-time heat stress. An early planting, on the other hand, accounts for high water demand but
ensures suitable temperature during the critical growth stages of the crop. The normal planting dates show the
possibility of day-time heat stress. So, late planting of temperature-tolerant cultivars or early planting of high-
yielding varieties would be recommended based on local water availability. However, adjustment of the planting
date is currently limited because high temperature-tolerant cultivars are not available in the study region.

1. Introduction

Climate change aﬀects the water requirement of crops. Irrigation
demand will increase in Europe, USA and some parts of Asia, while the
irrigated regions in India, Pakistan, and South-Eastern China might
experience a slight decrease in irrigation demand (Biemans et al.,
2013). Future irrigation demand is projected to exceed local water
availability in many places (Wada et al., 2013). According to Hijioka
et al. (2014), water scarcity due to increased water demand for popu-
lation growth and higher standard of living will be a major challenge
for most parts of Asia. Development of water saving technologies, in-
creased water productivity, and water reuse could be eﬀective in this
regard (Hijioka et al., 2014). However, irrigation for crop agriculture,
which is the largest water demand sector in Bangladesh, requires spe-
cial attention to deal with future water demand management. Improved
agricultural practices and irrigation management can play a vital role to
cope with the risk of water shortage.

Climate change induced changes in water demand, availability and

quality will impact water management decisions. Adaptation measures
to ensure proper water balance requires strategies for supply-side as
well as demand-side (Bates et al., 2008). One possible solution to re-
duce water demand for irrigation could be changing the cropping ca-
lendar. The changes in climatic parameters during recent decades
contributed to reduce irrigation requirements in North-West Bangla-
desh (Acharjee et al., 2017; Mojid et al., 2015). However, the water
demand for crop agriculture has increased due to expansion of irrigated
agriculture. Water demand for Boro rice will reduce in the future
(Acharjee et al., 2017). The total annual water demand for crop culti-
vation, however, may still increase due to increasing cropping intensity
as rice growth duration will become shorter. A shorter growing season
of Boro rice due to the crop's phenological responses to climate change
provides more ﬂexibility to shift planting times.

Climate change will not only result in an increase or decrease in
diﬀerent climatic parameters, but will also cause changes in seasonality
and variability of diﬀerent parameters. There will be large seasonal and
regional variations in climatic parameters in South Asia (Wassmann and

⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: tapos.acharjee@wur.nl (T.K. Acharjee).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2018.11.006
Received 10 June 2018; Received in revised form 9 November 2018; Accepted 12 November 2018
Available online 21 November 2018
0308-521X/ © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

T.K. Acharjee et al.

Agricultural Systems 168 (2019) 131–143

Fig. 1. The location of the study area.

Dobermann, 2007). The contrast in precipitation between wet and dry
seasons will increase in the future (IPCC, 2013). Change of planting
date of crops could be a simple and eﬀective way to deal with changes
in seasonal variability in climatic parameters. Following the climate
change, a shift in planting date may allow plants to be exposed to more
favourable conditions (Chun et al., 2016). For under developed coun-
tries, more emphasis on low-cost strategies is likely to be more eﬀective
for large-scale implementation. Farmers can adapt to changed climatic
conditions to some degree by changing planting dates, choosing culti-
vars of diﬀerent growth duration, or changing crop rotations
(Wassmann and Dobermann, 2007). Several researchers have indicated
that shifting the rice planting date could be an eﬀective solution to
improve rice yields in a changing climate. Simple adaptation options,
such as shifting planting dates, can be applied to signiﬁcantly increase
net water productivity (Mainuddin et al., 2011). High-temperature and
drought stresses can also be avoided by changing the transplanting date
or growth period (Shelley et al., 2016).

Agricultural production in South Asia may reduce by 30% by 2050s
if no action is taken to reduce the eﬀects of increasing temperature and
hydrologic disruption (Parry et al., 2007). As rice cultivation requires a
large quantity of water, both the yield and water requirements are
important aspects for optimizing the planting date. Previous studies
which assessed the impacts of changing planting date of Boro rice in
Bangladesh focusing only on yield (Basak et al., 2010; Karim et al.,

2012) and disregarded the impact on water use and/or requirements.
However, it is also important to understand the impacts of changing
planting date on the water requirements of the crop.

Extreme temperature events aﬀect growth and productivity of crops
because high temperatures are destructive for plant growth and de-
velopment. Critical temperatures vary with genotype, duration of cri-
tical temperature period, diurnal changes and physiological status of
the plant (Yoshida, 1981). Due to climate changes, the number of days
with extremely high temperatures will increase potentially reducing
crop yield. Changing planting dates can both increase and reduce the
risk of yield loss due to extreme temperatures. This study focused on
identiﬁcation of suitable planting date of Boro rice that can minimize
irrigation requirement without damaging the crop during the critical
period by extreme temperatures.

The objectives of the study were to assess the capacity and suit-
ability of shifting planting date of rice as a climate change adaptation
option. Several other studies have focused on yield estimation under
diﬀerent planting dates of Boro rice. Therefore, we mainly focused on
the water demand side of the crop for our analysis. We have estimated
water requirements for early, normal and late planting dates, and re-
ﬂected on high temperature duration to understand the suitability of
changing planting date. This study can help with developing strategies
to adapt Boro rice to climate change and managing water demand for
crop agriculture. It will enrich our existing knowledge of optimizing

132

T.K. Acharjee et al.

Agricultural Systems 168 (2019) 131–143

planting dates for future climate conditions and be useful for agri-
cultural specialists and water managers of Bangladesh.

2. Methodology

2.1. Crop, study area and data collection

Three-season rice, namely Aus, Aman and Boro are generally culti-
vated in Bangladesh. Boro is the dry season rice, grown under a constant
stagnant-water condition in the ﬁeld. It is planted from December to
early February, and harvested during April to June (Shelley et al.,
2016). The most common cropping pattern that includes Boro rice is
either Boro − T.Aman − Potato or Boro − T.Aman − Fallow. Bangla-
desh receives plenty of rainfall, which varies from 1527 to 4197 mm/
year, but it is not well distributed both spatially and temporally
(Shahid, 2011). Consequently, starting from 1970s, the development of
groundwater irrigation has dramatically boosted Boro rice cropping
area (Fujita, 2010). Rice plants encounter both low and high tem-
perature stress during diﬀerent growing seasons in Bangladesh (Shelley
et al., 2016).

The North-West part of Bangladesh extends from 23°47′ N to 25°50′
N latitude and from 88°01′ E to 89°48′ E longitude. Four North-West
districts − Bogra, Rajshahi, Pabna and Dinajpur – were selected for this
study (Fig. 1). Crop data related to dry season Boro rice were collected
from Bangladesh Agricultural Research Institute (BARI). Soil data were
standardized for a medium average soil for the selected districts from
FAO standard soil parameter values.

2.2. Development of climate scenarios

de

Five General Circulation Models (GCMs) and two emission scenarios
(RCP 4.5 and 8.5) were used to construct the future climate scenarios.
Maximum and minimum temperatures, rainfall, solar radiation and
wind speed for 2050s and 2080s, i.e. the time series of 2035–2065 and
2065–2095 were prepared. The ﬁrst GCM employed in this study was
the CNRM-CM5 model developed by CNRM-GAME (Centre National de
Recherches Météorologiques—Groupe d'études
l'Atmosphère
Météorologique) and Cerfacs (Centre Européen de Recherche et de
Formation Avancée) to contribute to 5th phase of the Coupled Model
Inter-comparison Project (CMIP5) that includes atmospheric, land sur-
face, ocean scheme, and sea ice models (Voldoire et al., 2013). The
second GCM used in this study was the EC-Earth model which is a
seamless Earth System Model that includes forecasting and climate
change studies into a single framework (Hazeleger et al., 2010). The
third GCM applied in this study was HadGEM2-ES model which is a
coupled Earth System Model used by the Met Oﬃce Hadley Centre for
the CMIP5 centennial simulations. The fourth GCM used in this study
was the IPSL-CM5A-LR model that includes 5 model components:
LMDz (atmosphere), NEMO (ocean, oceanic biogeochemistry and sea-
ice), ORCHIDEE (continental surfaces and vegetation), and INCA (at-
mospheric chemistry), coupled through OASIS. The ﬁfth GCM em-
ployed in this study was the MPI-ESM-LR model which is a compre-
hensive Earth-System Model that consists of ocean, atmosphere and
land surface component models. These models were selected for our
study because of their important criteria in evaluating the impacts of
climate change, such as ocean-atmosphere couple, multi-century si-
mulation capability, well documentation in literature, and participation
in the Coupled Model Inter-comparison Project (CMIP) (Barrow et al.,
2004). Two diﬀerent emission scenarios, RCP 4.5 and 8.5 were selected
for this study since they represent realistically low and high future
climate change scenarios. RCP 4.5 characterises stabilization without
overshoot pathway to 4.5 W/m2 (~650 ppm CO2 eq.) at stabilization
after 2100 and RCP 8.5 characterises rising radiative forcing pathway
leading to 8.5 W/m2 (~1370 ppm CO2 eq.) by 2100 (Van Vuuren et al.,
2011).

The future climate data for daily maximum and minimum

temperatures, rainfall, solar radiation and wind speed were generated
by statistical downscaling. For bias correction, the WATCH Forcing data
(Weedon et al., 2011) of monthly average maximum and minimum
temperatures, sunshine hours and wind speed, and monthly total
rainfall were compared to the observed historical data. Since, the GCM
outputs do not provide relative humidity; this was estimated following
the ratio between actual and saturation vapour pressures, which are
pure functions of temperature and can be calculated by a common
empirical interpolation function (Holbo, 1981; WMO, 1979). For humid
temperate climates, when temperature is at its daily minimum, air be-
comes saturated with water vapour. Hence, the general assumption to
estimate relative humidity from temperature data is to consider dew
point temperature as equal to the minimum temperature of the day
(Eccel, 2012).

2.3. Selection of planting dates and estimation of growth duration

Two normal planting (1 and 11 December), two early planting (1
and 11 November) and two late planting (31 December and 10
January) dates were selected for analysis. Following a 35-day nursery
stage, the corresponding transplanting date for normal, early and late
planting is: 05-Jan & 15-Jan; 06-Dec & 16-Dec; and 04-Feb & 14-Feb.
The lengths of four distinguished growth stages of Boro rice were esti-
mated for each transplanting date and for diﬀerent climate scenarios
following the growing degree days (GDD) method as:
GDD

)/2]

(1)

T
[(
max

T
min

T
base

−

=

+

where Tmax is the maximum temperature (°C), Tmin is the minimum
temperature (°C), and Tbase is the base temperature.

First, the GDD was estimated for four study districts using ﬁve cli-
mate models and two emission scenarios for each of the transplanting
dates. Later, the growth stage duration was estimated from GDDs and
accumulated heat values at the end of each stage as:

Growth stage duration days

(

)

Accumulated heat value at the end of the stage C

(

°

)

GDD for the corrosponding period C

(

°

)

(2)

=

The accumulated heat values (for the base temperature of 15 °C) at
the end of the growth stages for Boro rice in the North-West zone of
Bangladesh were taken from Mahmood (1997). The accumulated heat
values at the end of initial, vegetative, ﬂowering and maturing stages
were 80, 528, 1052 and 1291 °C, respectively for Bogra, Rajshahi and
Pabna; and 80, 515, 1032 and 1273 °C, respectively for Dinajpur. The
growing degree days method can consistently predict the growth
duration of crops (Miller et al., 2001).

The accumulated heat values for currently used long duration
varieties (e.g. BRRI dhan29) are about 16% higher compared to short
duration varieties (e.g. BRRI dhan28). Growth stage days for the pos-
sible future long-duration cultivars were estimated for Bogra. A 16%
increased accumulated heat values for each stage with an imposed
minimum duration for each stage was used. For the long-duration
cultivar, the accumulated heat values at the end of initial, vegetative,
ﬂowering and maturing stages were 93, 613, 1221 and 1498 °C, re-
spectively for Bogra. The imposed minimum number of days for initial,
development, mid-season and late-season were 22, 45, 36 and 18 days,
respectively.

2.4. Estimation of water requirements for diﬀerent planting times

CropWat model was used to estimate potential crop water require-
ment and potential irrigation requirement for crop evapotranspiration
based on climate, crop and soil data. It has been used extensively as a
decision-support tool in an international context to estimate regional
irrigation requirements (Clarke et al., 2001). This model was also suc-
cessfully applied to evaluate impacts of climate change on water

133

T.K. Acharjee et al.

Agricultural Systems 168 (2019) 131–143

Fig. 2. Growth duration (for the average of ﬁve models) of Boro rice under diﬀerent transplanting dates for four diﬀerent climate change scenarios.

requirements in several previous researches (Chowdhury et al., 2013;
Doria et al., 2006; Doria, 2010; Shrestha et al., 2013).

Water requirements of Boro rice were estimated using statistically
downscaled bias-corrected daily climate data from GCMs outputs for
four districts, ﬁve models and two RCPs for 2050s (average of 2035–65)
and 2080s (average of 2065–95). Potential crop water requirement is
calculated as total crop evapotranspiration (∑ETC) during the crop
growing period by considering changes in the length of growing season.
The Potential irrigation requirement for crop evapotranspiration is the total
amount of crop evapotranspiration in excess of eﬀective rainfall, ER, i.e.
∑ETC-ER. The eﬀective rainfall is the amount of rainfall that is eﬀec-
tively added and stored in the soil for later use by the crop and is de-
rived as a simulation output from CropWat.

To assess the impacts of climate change on water requirements
under diﬀerent trans−/planting dates of Boro rice, the inﬂuence of
management practices was excluded by modelling the rice growth in
CropWat under a standardized schedule that provides irrigation water
as required. The crop co-eﬃcient values were 0.7, 0.3, 0.5, 1.05 and
0.65 under dry condition, and 1.2, 1.05, 1.1, 1.2 and 0.95 under wet
condition for nursery, land preparation, initial, mid-season and late-
season, respectively. The scheduling criteria to estimate the net irri-
gation requirement was to provide irrigation at 5 mm water depth
above ground surface and reﬁll to 100 mm standing water.

2.5. Assessment of heat stress during critical periods

Spikelet sterility may occur at diﬀerent temperature thresholds
(Matthews et al., 1995; Nakagawa et al., 2003) since there is genotypic
variation in spikelet sterility at high temperature (Matsui et al., 2001;
Prasad et al., 2006; Satake and Yoshida, 1978). Also, shorter durations
at very higher temperatures may have the same eﬀect as longer dura-
tions at relatively less higher temperatures (Satake and Matsuo, 1995).
According to Laborte et al. (2012), the maximum temperature above
35 °C for 10 days can cause day time heat stress, and the minimum
temperature above 25 °C for 15 days can cause night time heat stress to
rice plant during the critical stages. First, we have identiﬁed the critical
period to high temperature stress for early, normal and late planting for
all studied districts, scenarios and climate models. For Bogra, Rajshahi
and Pabna, the identiﬁed critical stress periods were the days with

accumulated heat values from 659 to 1052 °C. For Dinajpur, the iden-
tiﬁed critical stress periods were the days with accumulated heat values
from 644 to 1032 °C. After identiﬁcation of the critical days, we iden-
tiﬁed the days with maximum temperature above 35 °C and minimum
temperature above 25 °C within those critical days. The number of days
with maximum temperature above 35 °C and minimum temperature
above 25 °C within critical periods were counted and their percentage
to total number of critical days were estimated for early, normal and
late planting under all studied districts, scenarios and models to un-
derstand suitability of changing the planting date of existing (i.e.
temperature intolerant) cultivars of Boro rice.

3. Results

3.1. Future rainfall in excess of evapotranspiration

The estimated future monthly rainfall in excess of evapotranspira-
tion, i.e. monthly rainfall minus evapotranspiration (Appendix Fig. A1)
indicates a ‘wet-get-wetter’ and ‘dry-get-drier’ situation in the North-
West Bangladesh. However, the annual distribution of future rainfall in
excess of evapotranspiration is almost similar to recent years in all
study districts. There will be more dry conditions from November to
April, which is the Boro growing season. The soil-water deﬁcit or
drought could be maximum during March–April. The dry months will
be drier in 2080s compared to 2050s. Also, the dry months will be drier
for a pronounced climate change (RCP 8.5) than a moderate climate
change scenario (RCP 4.5).

The ‘dry-get-drier’ situation during the dry winter months could be
because of less rainfall and/or increased evapotranspiration during this
period. The Mann-Kendall trends of estimated reference crop evapo-
transpiration during the dry months of the 2035–2065 and 2065–2095
time series by Acharjee et al. (2017) indicate a possible future increase
in daily evapotranspiration. The possible future monthly rainfall reveals
some increasing trends (Appendix Fig. A2). The study by Shahid (2011)
also indicates a signiﬁcant increase (6.05 mm/year) in annual pre-
cipitation in Bogra in the long-term trends during 1958–2007. There-
fore, the ‘dry-get-drier’ condition will be mainly because of increased
evapotranspiration despite some expected increase of rainfall amount in
the North-West Bangladesh.

134

T.K. Acharjee et al.

Agricultural Systems 168 (2019) 131–143

Fig. 3. Potential crop water requirement (for the average of ﬁve models) of Boro rice using six diﬀerent transplanting dates for RCPs 4.5 and 8.5 and two future
periods 2035e65 (2050s) and 2065e95 (2080s).

Fig. 4. Potential irrigation requirement for crop evapotranspiration (for the average of ﬁve models), ∑ETC − ER (mm) of Boro rice using six diﬀerent transplanting
dates for RCPs 4.5 and 8.5 and two future periods 2035e65 (2050s) and 2065e95 (2080s).

3.2. Future Boro growth duration under diﬀerent planting dates

3.3. Potential crop water requirements as aﬀected by planting dates

A shorter growth duration under late planting and a longer growth
duration under early planting compared to normal time planting were
observed (Fig. 2). The results are consistent for all study districts, em-
ployed models and scenarios. For the early planting, the rice plant re-
ceives a long winter period and the crop matures slowly during the low
temperature period, resulting in longer growth duration. For the late
panting, the rice plant receives an initial short winter period and
thereafter a pre-monsoon high temperature period. Hence, the rice
plant receives more number of high temperature days under the late
planting compared to early planting and, therefore, matures rapidly.

The potential crop water requirement, ∑ETC, will increase in case of
early planting and decrease in case of late planting compared to normal
time planting (Fig. 3). The estimated ∑ETC are consistent for all dis-
tricts, models and scenarios under consideration except in 2080s for
RCP 8.5. The ∑ETC for both the early and late planting exhibit an in-
crease compare to the normal time planting in 2080s for RCP 8.5. The
diﬀerence between potential crop water requirements for early and
normal planting is relatively smaller in Dinajpur compared to other
districts. The potential crop water requirement is consequently higher
in Pabna for all scenarios compared to other districts; this is not because
of longer growth duration, but due to higher daily evapotranspiration.

135

T.K. Acharjee et al.

Agricultural Systems 168 (2019) 131–143

The potential crop water requirement is higher in Pabna compared to
other districts which is because of higher rate of daily evapo-
transpiration in Pabna.

The estimated potential crop water requirement exhibits a clear link
with estimated growth duration of Boro rice under diﬀerent planting
dates. For early planting date, the longer growth duration resulted in
increased potential crop water requirement; while for late planting,
shorter growth duration resulted in reduced potential crop water re-
quirement. However, the potential crop water requirements will in-
crease for both early and late plantings in 2080s because of a rapid
climate change. Therefore, for a rapid climate change (RCP 8.5) in the
long term both early and late planting options would be ineﬀective in
terms of crop water requirements.

3.4. Potential irrigation requirements as aﬀected by planting dates

The potential irrigation requirement for crop evapotranspiration
(∑ETC − ER) showed an increase for early planting and a reduction for
late planting (Fig. 4). These results are consistent for all study districts,
models and scenarios, including 2080s for RCP 8.5. However, the
amount of reduction for the late planting is more than the amount of
increase for the early planting in comparison to normal planting date.
The estimated eﬀective rainfall during the Boro growth duration
reveals increased rainfall availability for late planting compared to the
early or normal planting (Fig. 5). The diﬀerence between rainfall
availabilities for the early and normal planting dates is less than the
diﬀerence between rainfall availabilities for the late and normal
planting dates. Therefore, a shift from normal to early plating dates will
allow a less change of rainfall availability than a shift from normal to
late planting. In other words, a shift of planting date from normal to late
planting can substantially increase the rainfall availability for Boro rice
cultivation.

3.5. Temperature stress as aﬀected by planting dates

High temperature stress reduces grain yield of rice by reducing the
percentage of ripened grains as a result of spikelet sterility (Oh-e et al.,
2007). The ﬂowering and booting are the most sensitive/critical stages
of rice to high temperature stress (Farrell et al., 2006; Satake and

Yoshida, 1978), which may sometimes lead to complete spikelet steri-
lity (Shah et al., 2011). For early planting, the critical period will begin
during 11/Feb – 20/Mar and continue till 11/Mar – 17/Apr depending
on diﬀerent years, scenarios and model estimates in Bogra. For normal
planting, the critical period will begin during 05/Mar – 01/Apr and
continue till 28/Mar – 26/Apr. For late planting, the critical period will
begin during 22/Mar – 12/Apr and continue till 12/Apr – 06/May. The
detail results on estimated dates of beginning and end date of critical
period of Boro rice in Bogra has been presented in Appendix (Fig. A.3).
For a late planting critical period also begins lately. Other districts also
show similar kind of results on estimated critical period dates (were
estimated but has not been presented in this paper). According to
Laborte et al. (2012), maximum temperature above 35 °C for 10 days
during the critical period can cause a day-time heat stress and minimum
temperature exceeding 25 °C for 15 days during critical period can
cause a night-time heat stress.

Our results indicate that for the late planting, with critical period
during late-March to early-May, there will be more chance of day-time
heat stress compared to early planting having critical period during
early-February to mid-April (Fig. 6). There will be also high risk of day
time heat stress for normal time planting. Krishnan et al. (2011) also
commented that, most agronomic interventions for dealing with high-
temperature stress aim at early sowing of rice or selection of early
maturing cultivars to avoid high temperatures during the grain ﬁlling
stage. There will be low risk of day time heat stress in Dinajpur com-
pared to other study districts because of less number of days with
maximum temperature above 35 °C in Dinajpur.

For the late planting, there will be more chance of night-time heat
stress compared to the early and normal time planting (Fig. 7). For most
of the scenarios, there is no chance of night-time heat stress for the
early planting. There will also be low risk of night time heat stress in
Dinajpur compared to other study districts because of less number of
days with minimum temperature above 25 °C in Dinajpur.

3.6. Long-duration cultivars of Boro rice as aﬀected by planting dates

The results discussed so far is a long-duration cultivar (e.g., BR29)
in the prevailing climate that will become a short-duration cultivar due
to accelerated growth under increased temperature in the future; this

Fig. 5. Eﬀective rainfall (for the average of ﬁve models) during Boro rice growth duration using six diﬀerent transplanting dates for RCPs 4.5 and 8.5 and two future
periods 2035e65 (2050s) and 2065e95 (2080s).

136

T.K. Acharjee et al.

Agricultural Systems 168 (2019) 131–143

Fig. 6. Percentage of critical period days with maximum temperature above 35 °C to total critical period days (for the average of ﬁve models) for early, normal and
late (trans)planting in 2050s and 2080s under RCP 4.5 and 8.5 in four study districts.

cultivar is hereafter stated as usual cultivar. A longer growth duration,
usually, allows the tillers to become more mature and produce large
number of panicles in winter season (Gomosta et al., 2001). Therefore,
farmers may choose a possible more longer duration variety in the fu-
ture that has been stated as long-duration cultivar in this study. Growth
duration is an important aspect for selecting the optimum planting date.
Therefore, we also presented the results for possible future long-dura-
tion cultivar of Boro rice (Fig. 8) and compared with the existing cul-
tivar (Fig. 9).

Similar kind of changes in growth duration of long-duration culti-
vars of Boro rice were obtained for diﬀerent planting dates like usual/
short duration cultivars (Appendix, Fig. A.4). However, the percentages
of increase in estimated growth duration of long duration cultivars are
diﬀerent for all planting dates. The percentage increase in growth
duration for the late planting is higher than the percentage increase for
the early planting. Therefore,
the diﬀerence in growth duration

between the early planting and late planting for long-duration cultivars
is lower than that for usual cultivars.

Similar kind of changes in potential crop water requirements, ef-
fective rainfall and potential irrigation requirements for crop evapo-
transpiration of long-duration cultivars of Boro rice were obtained for
diﬀerent planting dates under investigation for the usual cultivars
(Fig. 8). However, the diﬀerences between potential crop water re-
quirements of diﬀerent planting dates are smaller for the long-duration
variety compared to the usual duration variety. The diﬀerences in ef-
fective rainfall and irrigation requirement between the planting dates
seem larger for the long-duration variety compared to the usual dura-
tion variety. Longer growth duration, possibly, may bring more ﬂuc-
tuations in available rainfall because of changing trans−/planting
dates.

The diﬀerence in potential crop water requirements between the
long and short duration cultivars is similar for all planting dates

Fig. 7. Percentage of critical period days with minimum temperature above 25 °C to total critical period days (for the average of ﬁve models) for early, normal and
late (trans)planting in 2050s and 2080s under RCP 4.5 and 8.5 in four study districts.

137

T.K. Acharjee et al.

Agricultural Systems 168 (2019) 131–143

Fig. 8. Potential crop water requirement (PCWR),
eﬀective rainfall during crop growing period (ER)
and potential irrigation requirement for crop eva-
potranspiration (PIR) for long-duration cultivar of
Boro rice using six diﬀerent transplanting dates for
RCPs 4.5 and 8.5 and two future periods 2035e65
(2050s) and 2065e95 (2080s) in Bogra district.

Fig. 9. Diﬀerence in potential crop water require-
ment (PCWR), eﬀective rainfall during crop growing
period (ER) and potential irrigation requirement for
crop evapotranspiration (PIR) of long-duration cul-
tivar compared to usual duration cultivar of Boro rice
using six diﬀerent transplanting dates for RCPs 4.5
and 8.5 and two future periods 2035e65 (2050s)
and 2065e95 (2080s) in Bogra district.

(Fig. 9). However, the diﬀerence in eﬀective rainfalls and potential ir-
rigation requirements between the long and short duration cultivars is
diﬀerent for all planting dates. In 2080s for RCP 4.5 and in 2050s for
RCP 8.5, the variation in potential irrigation requirement diﬀerences is
much more between normal and late planting compared to normal and
early planting. This indicates that irrigation requirements may change
drastically from long to short duration cultivars between normal and
late planting dates for moderate climate change in 2080s or rapid cli-
mate change in 2050s. The decrease in potential irrigation require-
ments for long-duration cultivar compared to usual duration cultivar is
because of more rainfall availability during the later stages of the
growing season.

4. Discussion

Several factors may aﬀect the choice of the best or optimum
planting date. One of the main concerns for this choice is the amount of

water needed for cultivation of the crop, especially in water-limited
areas or drought-prone regions. Since, lack of water during dry season
is the major concern in the North-West Bangladesh, we have analysed
water requirements for diﬀerent planting dates of Boro rice.

4.1. Future Boro growth duration: estimates and possibilities

The study by Kabir et al. (2016) indicates that, the growth duration
of two transplanted Boro varieties (45-days old seedling) in the recent
climate (2001) varied about 5 and 10 days for one month shifting of
transplanting date from 15 December to 13 January. In our study, for
one month shifting of transplanting date from 16 December to 15
January of 35-days old seedling, the growth duration reduced 19 days
in the future. The increased variation in growth duration for one month
shifting of transplanting in our study is because of an accelerated ac-
cumulation of GDD due to more rapid future climate change compared
to recent climate change.

138

T.K. Acharjee et al.

Agricultural Systems 168 (2019) 131–143

There are two main aspects of future growth duration of Boro rice:
ﬁrstly, the changes in growth duration of current cultivars because of
increased temperature in the future, and, secondly, the growth duration
of possible new cultivars. Our estimates clearly indicate a considerable
inﬂuence of temperature diﬀerence, due to shifts in planting date, on
the growth duration of existing Boro cultivar under future climate
scenarios (Fig. 2). Rice matures rapidly during the warmer late period
compared to the cooler earlier period. However, the exact reduced
number of days for a late planting or increased number of days for an
early planting may be diﬀerent for diﬀerent Boro cultivars. As the future
shortening of growth duration can substantially reduce the rice yield,
farmers may need to change to a long-duration cultivar in the future to
maintain their yields. However, the inﬂuence of shifting planting date is
similar for both short and long-duration cultivars.

4.2. Potential crop water and irrigation requirements as inﬂuenced by
planting date

irrigation requirement

A delay in planting time of Boro rice reduces potential crop water
and irrigation requirements by enhancing the crop maturity compared
to early planting. Compared to the early planting, the potential crop
water requirements (averaged over all districts and models) reduced by
6.5 and 5.9% in 2050s for RCP 4.5 and 8.5, respectively, and by 5.7 and
0.6% in 2080s for RCP 4.5 and 8.5, respectively in case of late planting.
The potential
for crop evapotranspiration
(averaged over all districts and models) for late planting was reduced
by 31 and 21% in 2050s for RCP 4.5 and 8.5, respectively, and by 14%
in 2080s for both RCP 4.5 and 8.5 compared to normal planting dates.
The potential irrigation requirement for crop evapotranspiration for
late planting was reduced by 38 and 27% in 2050s for RCP 4.5 and 8.5,
respectively, and by 22 and 21% in 2080s for both RCP 4.5 and 8.5
compared to early planting. The reduction in irrigation requirements
for late planting is caused by high rainfall availability during the later
parts of the growing season. Late planting in winter, generally, ensures
a higher rainfall during the vegetative growth and brings some bene-
ﬁcial eﬀects by reducing the possibility of water stress (Karim et al.,
2012). The reduced crop growth duration and better rainfall accessi-
bility for the late planting dates ensure a much lower irrigation re-
quirement for Boro rice. Therefore, the late planting is a good choice for
the future from a water demand perspective.

A later planting date can substantially reduce the amount of irri-
gation required for Boro cultivation, but may reduce yield due to heavy
rainfall events before harvesting. Perez and Hosen (1987) reported that
rain can cause delay in harvest and increase proportion of broken grains
during milling. The number of heavy rainfall events will increase in the
future against a decrease in total rainy days in a year (Wassmann and
Dobermann, 2007); this can potentially reduce water availability for
crop growth because during heavy rainfall events runoﬀ is relatively
high and there is only limited water inﬁltration into the soil (Challinor
et al., 2004). Another major concern for late planting is the reduced
growth duration. Higher temperatures, by accelerating plant growth
rate, reduce growth duration leading to shorter grain ﬁlling period,
varying from 25 days in tropics to 35 days in temperate zones
(Swaminithan, 1984). However, selection of a suitable crop variety can
mitigate the impact of higher temperatures (Challinor et al., 2005).
Therefore, a suitable crop variety that can withstand higher tempera-
tures and heavy rainfall events is required for late planting strategies.

4.3. Planting date related temperature stress on Boro rice

The panicle initiation stage is sensitive to low-temperature damage,
whereas the ﬂowering stage is more sensitive to high-temperatures;
both cases can cause spikelet sterility (Shelley et al., 2016). At present,
early planted Boro rice in Bangladesh often faces low-temperature stress
at both vegetative and reproductive stages (Nahar et al., 2009). In
contrast, the late Boro rice often encounters high temperature stress at

the reproductive stage (Shelley et al., 2016). Our study indicate a high
chance of temperature stress for normal and late planting. The yield of
Boro rice may decline with late sowing due to greater exposure to high
temperature during anthesis (Ahmed et al., 2016). A study in Sri Lanka
by Dharmarathna et al. (2014) indicates that dry season rice yield
would increase when the planting date is advanced by one month. Both
daily maximum and minimum temperatures will increase in the future
due to global warming, which will reduce the chance of low-tempera-
ture damage during panicle initiation but increase the risk of high-
temperature damage during booting and ﬂowering. Both day- and
night-time high-temperatures are likely to become more crucial in the
future. Our results indicate that, day time heat stress can be more
crucial than the night time heat stress for Boro rice in the North-West
Bangladesh. The night time heat stress can be avoided by selecting an
early planting date. However, Boro rice may be aﬀected by day time
heat stress even in case of early planting. More studies on Boro rice
cultivars are required to minimize the heat stress induced spikelet
sterility. Studies on heat escape mechanism by early-morning ﬂowering
(Bheemanahalli et al., 2017; Hirabayashi et al., 2014; Ishimaru et al.,
2010), heat avoidance through transpiration cooling (Julia and
Dingkuhn, 2013), and heat tolerance to increase resilience by altering
cellular metabolites (Jagadish et al., 2009) need more attention. A high-
temperature tolerant rice variety is, therefore, highly recommended for
this region and, thereafter, a date between normal and late planting
may be chosen based on temperature-tolerance capacity of the selected
cultivar. Otherwise, an early planting would be more suitable to avoid
the risk of high temperature stress and, in such a case, other options of
water demand management need to be explored instead of the delayed
planting option for the reduction of water use.

4.4. Planting date change: an adaptation strategy

For wet season crops like Aman rice, farmers can adjust planting
date following the availability of rainfall. The erratic intensity and
distribution of pre-monsoon rainfall contributes to considerable varia-
tions in sowing dates between diﬀerent areas, sometimes within short
distances (Brammer, 1987). However, for dry season crops like Boro
rice, it is more diﬃcult to choose a suitable trans−/planting date, be-
cause the rainfall availability varies during the time period when the
rice plant requires it most.

Changing planting date may provide some adaptation options, but
that will be limited in the Indo-Gangetic plain by low winter tem-
peratures (Wassmann and Dobermann, 2007). Our results indicate, the
option of changing planting date, as an adaptation strategy, will be
limited by high temperature stress, especially in the case of late
planting choices. In the Indo-Gangetic plain, delayed planting is a well-
recognized cause of yield reduction in rice and wheat (Wassmann and
Dobermann, 2007). Therefore, identiﬁcation of the best or optimum
planting date may be a great challenge for the future, especially in case
of non-availability of temperature-tolerant varieties.

The risk of yield reduction of Boro rice due to both heat stress and
heavy rainfall/storm during harvesting period is high for the late
planting. Since, the heat-stress induced risk may not vary much
throughout the study region, it can be eliminated by choosing a tem-
perature-tolerant variety. But, the heavy shower/storm-related risk can
considerably vary depending on local geographic conditions, drainage
capacity, etc. in the region. Estimation of return period and better
forecast of extreme rainfall events/storms can help to reduce this risk.
Since irrigation demand is much less for late planting, farmers under
water-limited situation can be recommended to choose a late-planting
date taking into account of the impacts of high temperature stress.
Karim et al. (2012) reported signiﬁcant reduction in rice yield due to
lack of available water for early planting, especially before 28th Jan-
uary. The main limitation of late planting is the increased chance of
temperature stress during the critical stage of Boro rice. Climate change
may expose rice yield more vulnerable to transplanting date, predicting

139

T.K. Acharjee et al.

Agricultural Systems 168 (2019) 131–143

signiﬁcant yield reduction as transplanting date is delayed, especially
after 15 January (Basak et al., 2009). Another concern for late planting
is the increased possibility of heavy rainfall during rice harvesting that
cause crop failure. Late planting may also prevent the next crop from
being obtained the suitable condition later in the season (Matthews
et al., 1997). However, the late planting of temperature-tolerant culti-
vars would be the best choice for water-limited regions. For regions
with high water availability, the early planting of a long-duration high-
yielding cultivar would be the optimal choice in the future. Any long-
duration variety is not recommended for the low-lying Haor areas
where ﬂash ﬂoods may cause damage to Boro rice before harvesting.

Many investigators at several agricultural research institutes are
working to improve rice cultivars by incorporating tolerance to
drought, ﬂood and salinity. Most rice varieties, so far developed in
Bangladesh, cannot withstand high-temperature stresses (Shelley et al.,
2016). Development of heat-tolerant rice cultivars is, therefore, highly
recommended. This will not only increase crop yield but may also re-
duce irrigation requirement by adjusting planting date.

5. Conclusions

A delay in trans-/planting date enhances maturity of Boro rice and,

Appendix A

consequently, reduces potential crop water requirement compared to
early planting. Further reduction in irrigation requirement under late
planting occurs because of increased rainfall availability during the
later periods of crop growth. Hence, the late planting is a good choice
for the future from a water demand perspective. However, there will be
more chances of both day- and night-time heat stress for late compared
to early planting strategies of Boro rice. Shift of trans−/planting dates
may bring more ﬂuctuations in available rainfall and irrigation re-
quirements for long duration cultivars than short duration cultivars.
Although, shifting the planting date of the crop has the potential to
substantially reduce irrigation requirement, the option is, however,
highly limited by the possible high temperature stress. Therefore, de-
velopment of temperature-tolerant rice variety is a pre-requisite to re-
duce irrigation requirement by choosing late trans−/planting date.

Acknowledgement

The authors sincerely acknowledge the Nuﬃc NICHE-BGD-155
project for granting the fellowship to Tapos Kumar Acharjee for his PhD
study at Wageningen University and Research, the Netherlands.

Fig. A.1. Future changes in monthly rainfall in excess of evapotranspiration.

140

T.K. Acharjee et al.

Agricultural Systems 168 (2019) 131–143

Fig. A.2. Future monthly rainfall distribution and percent change (average of ﬁve models) in Bogra district; the error bars indicate variations by diﬀerent model
estimates.

Fig. A.3. Estimated beginning and end date of critical period of Boro rice in Bogra under six diﬀerent transplanting dates for RCPs 4.5 and 8.5 and two future periods
2035e65 (2050s) and 2065e95 (2080s) for ﬁve models (1 = CNRM-CM5, 2 = EC-Earth, 3 = HadGEM2-ES, 4 = IPSL-CM5A-LR, and 5 = MPI-ESM-LR).

141

T.K. Acharjee et al.

Agricultural Systems 168 (2019) 131–143

Fig. A.4. Growth-stage-days and percent increase in growth-stage-days (average of ﬁve models) for long-duration cultivars (top) compared to that for usual cultivars
(bottom) for six diﬀerent transplanting dates for RCPs 4.5 and 8.5 and two future periods 2035e65 (2050s) and 2065e95 (2080s) in Bogra.

References

Acharjee, T.K., Halsema, G., Ludwig, F., Hellegers, P., 2017. Declining trends of water
requirements of dry season Boro rice in the North-West Bangladesh. Agric. Water
Manag. 180, 148–159.

Acharjee, T.K., Ludwig, F., van Halsema, G., Hellegers, P., Supit, I., 2017. Future changes

in water requirements of Boro rice in the face of climate change in North-West
Bangladesh. Agric. Water Manag. 194, 172–183.

Ahmed, S., Humphreys, E., Chauhan, B.S., 2016. Optimum sowing date and cultivar

duration of dry-seeded boro on the high Ganges river ﬂoodplain of Bangladesh. Field
Crop Res. 190, 91–102.

Barrow, E., Maxwell, B., Gachon, P., 2004. Climate Variability and Change in Canada:

Past, Present and Future. ACSD science assessment series.

Basak, J.K., Ali, M.A., Islam, M.N., Alam, M.J.B., 2009. Assessment of the eﬀect of climate

change on boro rice production in Bangladesh using CERES-Rice model. In:
Proceedings of the International Conference on Climate Change Impacts and
Adaptation Strategies for Bangladesh, pp. 103–113.

Basak, J.K., Ali, M.A., Islam, M.N., Rashid, M.A., 2010. Assessment of the eﬀect of climate
change on boro rice production in Bangladesh using DSSAT model. J. Civ. Eng. 38,
95–108 IEB).

Bates, B., Kundzewicz, Z., Wu, S., 2008. Climate Change and Water.

Intergovernmental

Panel on Climate Change Secretariat.

Bheemanahalli, R., Sathishraj, R., Manoharan, M., Sumanth, H., Muthurajan, R.,

Ishimaru, T., Krishna, J.S., 2017. Is early morning ﬂowering an eﬀective trait to
minimize heat stress damage during ﬂowering in rice? Field Crop Res. 203, 238–242.

Biemans, H., Speelman, L., Ludwig, F., Moors, E., Wiltshire, A., Kumar, P., Gerten, D.,

Kabat, P., 2013. Future water resources for food production in ﬁve South Asian river
basins and potential for adaptation—A modeling study. Sci. Total Environ. 468,
S117–S131.

Brammer, H., 1987. Drought in Bangladesh: lessons for planners and administrators.

Disasters 11, 21–29.

Challinor, A., Wheeler, T., Craufurd, P., Slingo, J., 2005. Simulation of the impact of high

temperature stress on annual crop yields. Agric. For. Meteorol. 135, 180–189.

Challinor, A., Wheeler, T., Craufurd, P., Slingo, J., Grimes, D., 2004. Design and opti-

misation of a large-area process-based model for annual crops. Agric. For. Meteorol.
124, 99–120.

Chowdhury, S., Al-Zahrani, M., Abbas, A., 2013. Implications of Climate Change on Crop

Water Requirements in Arid Region: An Example of Al-Jouf. Journal of King Saud
University – Engineering Sciences, Saudi Arabia.

Chun, J.A., Li, S., Wang, Q., Lee, W.-S., Lee, E.-J., Horstmann, N., Park, H., Veasna, T.,
Vanndy, L., Pros, K., 2016. Assessing rice productivity and adaptation strategies for
Southeast Asia under climate change through multi-scale crop modeling. Agric. Syst.
143, 14–21.

Clarke, D., Smith, M., El-Askari, K., 2001. CropWat for Windows: User Guide. (IHE.).
Dharmarathna, W., Herath, S., Weerakoon, S., 2014. Changing the planting date as a
climate change adaptation strategy for rice production in Kurunegala district, Sri
Lanka. Sustain. Sci. 9, 103–111.

Doria, R.O., 2010. Impact of Climate Change on Crop Water Requirements in Eastern

Canada. Department of Bioresource Engineering. McGill University.

Doria, R., Madramootoo, C., Mehdi, B., 2006. Estimation of Future Crop Water

Requirements for 2020 and 2050, Using CROPWAT, EIC Climate Change Technology.
IEEE. pp. 1–6.

Eccel, E., 2012. Estimating air humidity from temperature and precipitation measures for

modelling applications. Meteorol. Appl. 19, 118–128.

Farrell, T., Fox, K., Williams, R., Fukai, S., 2006. Genotypic variation for cold tolerance

during reproductive development in rice: screening with cold air and cold water.

Field Crop Res. 98, 178–194.

Fujita, K., 2010. Re-Thinking Economic Development. The Green Revolution, Agrarian

Structure and Transformation in Bangladesh. Kyoto University Press, Japan.

Gomosta, A., Quayyum, H., Mahbub, A., 2001. Tillering Duration and Yielding Ability of
Rice Varieties in the Winter Rice Season of Bangladesh. International Rice Research
Conference, Los Baños, Laguna (Philippines) 31 Mar-3 Apr 2000. IRRI.

Hazeleger, W., Severijns, C., Semmler, T., Stefanescu, S., Yang, S., Wang, X., Wyser, K.,
Dutra, E., Baldasano, J.M., Bintanja, R., 2010. EC-Earth. Bull. Am. Meteorol. Soc. 91,
1357.

Hijioka, Y., Lin, E., Pereira, J.J., Corlett, R.T., Cui, X., Insarov, G.E., Lasco, R.D., Lindgren,

E., Surjan, A., 2014. Asia. In: Barros, V.R., Field, C.B., Dokken, D.J., Mastrandrea,
M.D., Mach, K.J., Bilir, T.E., Chatterjee, M., Ebi, K.L., Estrada, Y.O., Genova, R.C.,
Girma, B., Kissel, E.S., Levy, A.N., MacCracken, S., Mastrandrea, P.R., White, L.L.
(Eds.), Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part B:
Regional Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 1327–1370.

Hirabayashi, H., Sasaki, K., Kambe, T., Gannaban, R.B., Miras, M.A., Mendioro, M.S.,

Simon, E.V., Lumanglas, P.D., Fujita, D., Takemoto-Kuno, Y., 2014. qEMF3, a novel
QTL for the early-morning ﬂowering trait from wild rice, Oryza oﬃcinalis, to miti-
gate heat stress damage at ﬂowering in rice, O. sativa. J. Exp. Bot. 66, 1227–1236.
Holbo, H., 1981. A dew-point hygrometer for ﬁeld use. Agric. Meteorol. 24, 117–130.
IPCC, 2013. Summary for Policymakers. In: Stocker, T.F., Qin, D., Plattner, G.-K., Tignor,

M., Allen, S.K., Boschung, J., Nauels, A., Xia, Y., Bex, V., Midgley, P.M. (Eds.),
Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to
the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.
Ishimaru, T., Hirabayashi, H., Ida, M., Takai, T., San-Oh, Y.A., Yoshinaga, S., Ando, I.,

Ogawa, T., Kondo, M., 2010. A genetic resource for early-morning ﬂowering trait of
wild rice Oryza oﬃcinalis to mitigate high temperature-induced spikelet sterility at
anthesis. Ann. Bot. 106, 515–520.

Jagadish, S., Muthurajan, R., Oane, R., Wheeler, T.R., Heuer, S., Bennett, J., Craufurd,

P.Q., 2009. Physiological and proteomic approaches to address heat tolerance during
anthesis in rice (Oryza sativa L.). J. Exp. Bot. 61, 143–156.

Julia, C., Dingkuhn, M., 2013. Predicting temperature induced sterility of rice spikelets

requires simulation of crop-generated microclimate. Eur. J. Agron. 49, 50–60.

Kabir, M., Howlader, M., Biswas, J., Mahbub, M., Elahi, M.N.E., 2016. Probability of low

temperature stress at diﬀerent growth stages of Boro rice. Bangladesh Rice J 19,
19–27.

Karim, M.R., Ishikawa, M., Ikeda, M., Islam, M.T., 2012. Climate change model predicts
33% rice yield decrease in 2100 in Bangladesh. Agron. Sustain. Dev. 32, 821–830.
Krishnan, P., Ramakrishnan, B., Reddy, K.R., Reddy, V., 2011. High-temperature eﬀects

on rice growth, yield, and grain quality. In: Advances in Agronomy. Elsevier, pp.
87–206.

Laborte, A., Nelson, A., Jagadish, K., Aunario, J., Sparks, A., Ye, C., Redoña, E., 2012. Rice

feels the heat. In: Rice Today, July–September, 30–31.

Mahmood, R., 1997. Impacts of air temperature variations on the boro rice phenology in

Bangladesh: implications for irrigation requirements. Agric. For. Meteorol. 84,
233–247.

Mainuddin, M., Kirby, M., Hoanh, C.T., 2011. Adaptation to climate change for food

security in the lower Mekong Basin. Food Security 3, 433–450.

Matsui, T., Omasa, K., Horie, T., 2001. The diﬀerence in sterility due to high temperatures
during the ﬂowering period among japonica-rice varieties. Plant Production Science
4, 90–93.

Matthews, R.B., Kropﬀ, M.J., Bachelet, D., van Laar, H.H., 1995. Modeling the impact of
climate change on rice production in Asia. Int. Rice Res. Inst.Modeling the impact of
climate change on rice production in Asia. Int. Rice Res. Inst.

142

T.K. Acharjee et al.

Agricultural Systems 168 (2019) 131–143

Shah, F., Huang, J., Cui, K., Nie, L., Shah, T., Chen, C., Wang, K., 2011. Impact of high-
temperature stress on rice plant and its traits related to tolerance. J. Agric. Sci. 149,
545–556.

Shahid, S., 2011. Trends in extreme rainfall events of Bangladesh. Theor. Appl. Climatol.

104, 489–499.

Shelley, I.J., Takahashi-Nosaka, M., Kano-Nakata, M., Haque, M.S., Inukai, Y., 2016. Rice

Cultivation in Bangladesh: Present Scenario, Problems, and Prospects.

Shrestha, S., Gyawali, B., Bhattarai, U., 2013. Impacts of Climate Change on Irrigation

Water Requirements for Rice–Wheat Cultivation in Bagmati River Basin. Nepal.

Swaminithan, M.S., 1984. Rice. Sci. Am 250, 81–93.
Van Vuuren, D.P., Edmonds, J., Kainuma, M., Riahi, K., Thomson, A., Hibbard, K., Hurtt,

G.C., Kram, T., Krey, V., Lamarque, J.-F., 2011. The representative concentration
pathways: an overview. Clim. Chang. 109, 5–31.

Voldoire, A., Sanchez-Gomez, E.Y., Mélia, D.S., Decharme, B., Cassou, C., Sénési, S.,

Valcke, S., Beau, I., Alias, A., Chevallier, M., 2013. The CNRM-CM5. 1 global climate
model: description and basic evaluation. Clim. Dyn. 40, 2091–2121.

Wada, Y., Wisser, D., Eisner, S., Flörke, M., Gerten, D., Haddeland, I., Hanasaki, N.,

Masaki, Y., Portmann, F.T., Stacke, T., 2013. Multimodel projections and un-
certainties of irrigation water demand under climate change. Geophys. Res. Lett. 40,
4626–4632.

Wassmann, R., Dobermann, A., 2007. Climate Change Adaptation through Rice

Production in Regions with High Poverty Levels.

Weedon, G., Gomes, S., Viterbo, P., Shuttleworth, W.J., Blyth, E., Österle, H., Adam, J.,
Bellouin, N., Boucher, O., Best, M., 2011. Creation of the WATCH forcing data and its
use to assess global and regional reference crop evaporation over land during the
twentieth century. J. Hydrometeorol. 12, 823–848.

WMO, 1979. Technical Regulations.
Yoshida, S., 1981. Fundamentals of rice crop science Int. Rice Res. Inst.Fundamentals of

I WMO, Geneva, Switzerland pp. I-Ap-C-3.

rice crop science Int. Rice Res. Inst.

Matthews, R., Kropﬀ, M., Horie, T., Bachelet, D., 1997. Simulating the impact of climate
change on rice production in Asia and evaluating options for adaptation. Agric. Syst.
54, 399–425.

Miller, P., Lanier, W., Brandt, S., 2001. Using growing degree days to predict plant stages.
In: Ag/Extension Communications Coordinator, Communications Services. Montana
State University-Bozeman, Bozeman, MO.

Mojid, M., Rannu, R., Karim, N., 2015. Climate change impacts on reference crop eva-

potranspiration in North-West hydrological region of Bangladesh. Int. J. Climatol. 35,
4041–4046.

Nahar, K., Biswas, J., Shamsuzzaman, A., Hasanuzzaman, M., Barman, H., 2009.

Screening of indica rice (Oryza sativa L.) genotypes against low temperature stress.
Bot. Res. Int 2, 295–303.

Nakagawa, H., Horie, T., Matsui, T., 2003. Eﬀects of climate change on rice production
and adaptive technologies. In: International Rice Research Conference. International
Rice Research Institute, Beijing, China 16–19 September 2002.

Oh-E, I., Saitoh, K., Kuroda, T., 2007. Eﬀects of high temperature on growth, yield and

dry-matter production of rice grown in the paddy ﬁeld. Plant Production Sci 10,
412–422.

Parry, M., Canziani, O., Palutikof, J., van der Linden, P.J., Hanson, C.E., 2007. Climate
Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.

Perez, F., Hosen, A., 1987. Eﬀect of Simulated Rain on Head Rice Yields of Varieties
Under Delayed Harvest. (International Rice Research Newsletter (Philippines)).

Prasad, P., Boote, K., Allen Jr., L., Sheehy, J., Thomas, J., 2006. Species, ecotype and

cultivar diﬀerences in spikelet fertility and harvest index of rice in response to high
temperature stress. Field Crop Res. 95, 398–411.

Satake, T., Matsuo, T., 1995. High temperature injury, Science of the rice plant. Food

Agricultural Policy Res Centre 2, 805–812.

Satake, T., Yoshida, S., 1978. High temperature-induced sterility in indica rices at ﬂow-

ering. Japanese J. Crop Science 47, 6–17.

143

