www.elsevier.com/locate/worlddev

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2012.11.011

Reversing Urban Bias in African Rice Markets: Evidence from Senegal

World Development Vol. 45, pp. 63–74, 2013
Ó 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
0305-750X/$ - see front matter

Africa Rice Center (AfricaRice), Saint-Louis, Senegal

MATTY DEMONT

PIETER RUTSAERT

Ghent University, Belgium

MAIMOUNA NDOUR

Africa Rice Center (AfricaRice), Saint-Louis, Senegal

and

WIM VERBEKE *

Ghent University, Belgium

Summary. — Urban bias constitutes an important institutional impediment to economic development in poor countries. Some African
governments now recognize that they should invest in agricultural productivity in order to reverse urban bias, but often forget the
equally important objective of investing in quality tailored to consumers so as to reverse urban bias’ footprint on food markets. We
conduct framed ﬁeld experiments in two major urban markets in Senegal and ﬁnd that the majority of urban consumers are willing
to pay quality premiums for local rice suggesting that investment in post-harvest rice quality is a priority in the reversal of urban bias.
Ó 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Key words — West Africa, Senegal, agricultural policy, value chain upgrading, experimental auction, standards

1. INTRODUCTION

Urban bias is one of the largest institutional impediments to
the competitiveness of food sectors in the world’s poorest
countries. The term was ﬁrst popularized by Lipton (1977)
and later deﬁned by Bezemer and Headey (2008) as the “inef-
ﬁcient and systemic bias against agriculture and the rural
economy in the allocation of developmental resources” (p.
1342). Causes of urban bias include (i) the colonial inheritance
of a dualistic economy; (ii) the fact that externalities to agricul-
ture are not internalized; and (iii) the existence of severe mar-
ket failures in agriculture. Agriculture’s beneﬁts are typically
external to the sector itself and instead accrue to non-agricul-
tural investors, who gain from low food prices and an ample
supply of cheap rural labor. Private investors will therefore
under-invest relative to the social optimum, which justiﬁes a
role for government intervention in coordinating the develop-
ment of the food sector (Bezemer & Headey, 2008).

In the African development literature, urban bias of state-
led eﬀorts during the two decades following independence is
often discussed in terms of price controls to beneﬁt urban con-
sumers and the taxation of agriculture in support of industry
(Moseley, Carney, & Becker, 2010). Urban-biased policies
responded to a long-term, structural trend toward rice consump-
tion linked to urbanization. West African consumers have
been gradually shifting their consumption patterns from
traditional coarse grains (maize, millet, and sorghum) to
non-traditional grains (wheat and rice) due to the increasing
time spent working outside home. Urban working women
have less time for food preparation and have a tendency
toward “convenience” sources of calories (Reardon, 1993).
Urban-biased policies contributed to this trend by encourag-
ing food imports and their focus on rice was primarily driven

by a desire to satisfy the demands of growing urban popula-
tions for aﬀordable food rather than as a goal to improve
the livelihoods of rural producers (Moseley et al., 2010).
Indeed, both low food prices and cheap rural labor can also
be obtained—in the short run, at least—from urban-biased
policies so that investments in agriculture are not always
perceived as necessary, despite pervasive market failure in this
sector
In particular,
countries where the primary urban center is also a port—for
instance Senegal’s Port de Dakar, one of the major seaports
in West Africa, grants easier access to food imports than food
grown in the country’s hinterland—are more susceptible to
urban-biased policies than landlocked countries (Saverimuttu
& Rempel, 2004).

(Binswanger & Deininger, 1997).

At the international level organizations are beginning to rec-
ognize the need to invest in agriculture. The World Bank
named its 2008 World Development Report “Agriculture for
Development,” i.e., for the ﬁrst time in more than two decades
agriculture is at the center of attention again. Partly, it is a
reﬂection of the fact that growth in demand for food is outp-
acing supply and that without development in agriculture,
reaching Millennium Development Goals on poverty and hun-
ger will remain elusive (World Bank, 2008). Some African
countries now recognize that agricultural growth, and hence
reversal of urban bias, is a precondition to broader growth.

* Financing from the European Union is greatly acknowledged. We are
grateful to Racky Diop and El Hadj Gueye for their assistance during the
experiments and Caitlin Costello for proofreading the manuscript. In
2011, our experimental auctions were reproduced, staged, ﬁlmed, and b-
roadcasted by French National TV. Final revision accepted: November
22, 2012.

63

64

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

However, their food self-suﬃciency programs typically focus
solely on production, with a disregard to the other changes
that need to complement such measures.

A large body of literature analyzed the eﬀectiveness of
price policies in reversing the trend from traditional
local
grains to wheat and rice (Akindes, 1999; Diagana, Akindes,
Savadogo, Reardon, & Staatz, 1999; Diagana & Reardon,
1999; Ju¨ tting, 2000; Kelly, Reardon, Diagana, & Fall, 1995;
Reardon, 1993; Reardon et al., 1997; Singare et al., 1999).
In the past, two methods had been advocated to reduce im-
ports and shift consumption to domestic cereals, i.e., devalu-
ation and import tariﬀs. Both methods relied on raising the
price of imported cereals, and assumed that (i) consumers
would easily and swiftly substitute away from imported rice
and wheat and toward local coarse grains; and (ii) that it
would mainly be the richer consumers who would be aﬀected
by initial price rises (Diagana et al., 1999). Reardon (1993),
however challenged these assumptions and predicted that
“rice price increases, induced by protection or devaluation
or other measures, will hurt the poorest tercile disproportion-
ately, and reduce the real incomes of all consumers, espe-
cially in urban areas but also in some rural areas [. . .]
before the coarse grain processing industry increases its
capacity and eﬃciency” (p. 30–31).

The 50% devaluation of the CFA Franc in 1994 provided a
unique test case to observe the impact of an increase—more
precisely a doubling in this case—of imported rice prices on
reversal of urban bias, as the latter was an implicit goal of
the devaluation. However, instead of reducing imported rice
intake, consumers responded to the devaluation by de-diversi-
fying their consumption patterns due to non-price attributes
such as availability and cooking easiness. Both Senegal and
Coˆ te d’Ivoire—the biggest rice importers endowed with a
port—actually increased rice imports after devaluation; only
Burkina Faso and Mali—both landlocked countries and small
rice importers—had small reductions or stagnation in rice im-
ports (Diagana et al., 1999). Kelly et al. (1995) further ob-
served in Senegal that urban households were hit hardest by
the devaluation because they consume large quantities of im-
ported rice and do not earn income from peanut exports.
Hence, the conclusion from this body of research was that
price policies did not achieve their goal of reversing urban bias
due to low price response of West-African rice consumers and
producers.

The crucial question now becomes how to reverse urban bias
in African rice markets. In order to respond to this question,
the paper proceeds as follows. After this introduction, in Sec-
tion 2 we discuss the main challenge in reversing urban bias
with a special focus on Senegal. In Section 3 we design a set
of framed ﬁeld experiments followed by an econometric ap-
proach in order to analyze this challenge in the case of Sene-
gal. Section 4 analyzes the data and reports the results.
Section 5 draws a set of policy recommendations from the pre-
vious sections and Section 6 concludes.

2. REVERSING URBAN BIAS

The literature reviewed above advances the proposition that
policies should target intrinsic, non-price characteristics of
rice. In the early 1990s agricultural economists recommended
R&D in quality and processing and generic promotion of local
coarse grains as alternatives to imported rice and wheat
(Boughton & Reardon, 1997; Kennedy & Reardon, 1994).
Remarkably, these aspects have been largely ignored in the
policy debate on local rice, a critique which was already raised

in the 80s by Ross (1983) when criticizing one of the most
comprehensive books on policy and economics of rice in West
Africa (Pearson et al., 1981): “The authors do not discuss the
problem of consumer tastes and responsiveness to the locally
grown varieties which would replace rice imports. This issue
is particularly important in Senegal” (p. 336).

While total food production in Senegal has doubled since
the 1960s, per capita food production has fallen by almost
50% as it could not keep pace with the country’s high level
of population growth (Bru¨ ntrup, Nguyen, & Kaps, 2006). Sen-
egal is the third-largest rice importer in Africa, after Nigeria
and Coˆ te d’Ivoire (USDA, 2011, 2012). Its high dependence
on imported rice renders the country vulnerable to interna-
tional market shocks with severe consequences on food secu-
rity and political stability, as witnessed during the 2008 food
crisis (Becker & Yoboue´, 2009; Moseley et al., 2010; Seck,
Tollens, Wopereis, Diagne, & Bamba, 2010).

Even more problematic is the fact that more than half a cen-
tury of urban-biased policies and cheap rice imports have
shaped urban Senegalese consumer patterns. Rice imports into
Senegal, particularly, consist almost entirely of broken rice. In
international markets, broken rice is considered an inferior
product and is therefore cheaper than whole-grain rice. Dur-
ing the colonial period under the French administration, cheap
broken rice from Asia was imported in large quantities in or-
der to keep food prices under control and at the same time
promote groundnut production as an important cash crop.
The import policy remained unchanged after independence
in 1960. Senegal continued to export groundnuts but argued
that industrialization would oﬀer better prospects for eco-
nomic development. Senegal has almost no natural resources
of its own so cheap labor was essential to achieve industriali-
zation. Cheap labor relies on cheap food and import was the
easiest way to ensure cheap food (Bru¨ ntrup et al., 2006). Polit-
ically, urban dwellers were and still are the most important
voters in post-colonial West Africa; policies that promote local
food production through price increases and import reduction
almost always encounter heavy resistance (Moseley et al.,
2010).

Many attempts have been undertaken by the Government of
Senegal and donors in order to reverse urban bias. The most
recent one is the GOANA program (Grand Oﬀensive in Agri-
culture for Food and Abundance), launched in April 2008 by
former Senegalese President Abdoulaye Wade (Diagne,
Demont, Seck, & Diaw, 2013). The goal of the program is
to make Senegal self-suﬃcient in food by 2015, notably by irri-
gating and cultivating unused land near the Senegal River Val-
ley (SRV) and ramping up the production of rice, the staple
food for millions of Senegalese (Ministe`re de l’Agriculture et
de l’Elevage, 2008). However, despite past and current pro-
grams, in 2010–2011 available domestic rice production still
covered only 39% of domestic demand (ANSD, 2011). The
problem is that similarly to past programs, GOANA almost
exclusively focuses on area expansion and production. In
November 2008, 6 months after the price spikes, local rice
prices sharply eroded in the SRV when rice farmers were
bringing the surplus generated by the GOANA program to
market (Demont & Rizzotto, 2012). If the surplus is not timely
and suﬃciently picked up by consumers, some of the invest-
ment eﬀorts and production incentives are lost due to eroded
prices (Barrett, 2008). Hence, by ignoring the integral compo-
nents further downstream in the supply chain like processing
and marketing, some of the upstream investment eﬀorts may
not yield the anticipated return due to ineﬃciency losses, jeop-
ardizing the national objective of combating import depen-
dency and food insecurity.

REVERSING URBAN BIAS IN AFRICAN RICE MARKETS: EVIDENCE FROM SENEGAL

65

400

360

320

280

240

200

160

120

80

40

/

)
g
k
A
F
C
F
(
 
s
e
c

i
r
p
e
c

 

i
r
 
l

a
u
n
n
A

0
1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Imported broken rice price

Year
Conventional SRV rice price

Price gap (%)

100%

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

2012

Figure 1. Evolution of annual retail prices of imported broken rice and SRV rice and price gap in Saint-Louis, 1997–2012 (CSA, 2012).

Senegalese policy makers now face the remaining eﬀects of
the historical urban bias in their rice markets; i.e., consumers
have assimilated imported rice in their consumption patterns
and even have developed a marked preference for it. Figure 1
shows the evolution of annual retail prices for imported bro-
ken rice and conventional SRV rice and the relative price
gap between both from 1997 to 2012. 1 In May 2008, world
rice prices tripled in just a few months’ time to reach a higher
plateau due to underlying structural trends. The graph further
suggests that Senegalese consumers consistently pay price pre-
miums averaging 15% for imported broken rice relative to
conventional SRV rice. We observe that the relative price
gap is positively correlated with rice prices, i.e., when the
latter rise the gap widens and when the latter decline the gap
narrows. This imperfect price transmission suggests that
both rice types are perceived by consumers as imperfect
substitutes. Hence, before urban bias can be reversed, eﬀorts
will be needed in order to reverse its footprint on rice markets
ﬁrst.

Some advocate that the reason urban consumers continue to
prefer imported rice is due to the inferior post-harvest grain
quality of local rice which is notorious for its heterogeneous
grain size composition and impurity (Seck et al., 2010). How-
ever, Batra, Ramaswamy, Alden, Steenkamp, and Ramac-
hander (2000)
found that—for reasons that go beyond
quality—some consumers in less developed economies attitu-
dinally prefer products perceived as having a non-local origin
to products seen as local. Indeed, evidence supports the idea
that products from less developed economies are generally per-
ceived to be lower in quality, and associated with a larger risk
of dissatisfaction (Batra et al., 2000; Ehmke, Lusk, & Tyner,
2008). This suggests that country of origin not only serves as
a quality halo or summary of product quality (Han, 1989),
but also possesses an additional dimension of “foreignness”
that contributes to attitudinal liking for status-enhancing rea-
sons, a general phenomenon reported in African developing
economies (e.g., Arnould, 1989; Friedman, 1990; Opoku &
Akorli, 2009).

The fundamental question for policy makers in the reversal
of urban bias’ footprint on Senegal’s rice markets—and the
main motivation of this article—is whether Senegalese urban
consumers prefer imported rice for its superior post-harvest
grain quality or for its “foreignness.” In other words, does
the persistent preference gap revealed through market prices
(Figure 1) purely reﬂect diﬀerences in quality or is it driven
by perceived diﬀerences in image of the product and its origin
and rigid consumption patterns? If only the ﬁrst factor was at
work, urban bias’ footprint could be reversed through invest-
ment in quality upgrading alone; if multiple factors were at
work, reversing urban bias would require additional invest-
ments in branding, generic advertising and promotion.

Recent events in the SRV provide a potentially interesting
test case to assess whether urban bias’ footprint on Senegalese
rice markets can be reversed through investments in quality
and branding. In 2007, a quality rice brand RivalÒ (Riz de la
Valle´e) was introduced in the SRV by the Oxfam-funded plat-
form PINORD (Platforme d’appui aux Initiatives du Nord),
which governs quality at all stages of the production process
and provides micro-ﬁnancing to “rural micro-enterprises”
(RMEs). However, the product was only available in limited
quantities in rural areas in the SRV, a few urban consumption
centers (Louga, Kaolack, and Touba) and some Oxfam bou-
tiques in Dakar during the period 2007–2011. In other words,
it never managed to gain substantial market share on the mar-
kets of Saint-Louis, let alone Dakar. 2 Hence, it remains to be
seen whether and how much urban consumers are willing to
pay for an emerging product such as quality rice branded
through a local origin label.

Fall and Diagne (2008) conducted a ﬁrst attempt to estimate
the willingness-to-pay (WTP) for SRV rice through a stated
preference survey including 500 households in Senegal. How-
ever, the crucial question is not how much consumers are will-
ing to pay for local rice. Such preferences are revealed on the
market through the price premiums they are willing to pay for
imported rice (Figure 1). The question is whether they are will-
ing to pay similar price premiums for local rice if labeled as

66

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

such and if quality is tailored to urban consumer standards.
Moreover, Harrison and Rutstro¨ m (2008) demonstrate that
in stated preference methods participants typically overstate
their WTP. Hence, to answer this question while reducing po-
sitive bias, we conduct framed ﬁeld experiments based on auc-
tion markets designed to elicit consumers’ revealed WTP for
the quality attributes of rice and to empirically test whether ur-
ban bias can be reversed in urban rice markets in Senegal. Be-
cause real products and real money are exchanged in
experimental auctions, participants have increased incentives
to reveal their true value for the attributes under research. 3

3. DATA AND METHODOLOGY

(a) Framed ﬁeld experiments

We conducted framed ﬁeld experiments 4 in two major ur-
ban consumption zones, i.e., the capital Dakar, close to the
port and far from the rice production zones, and Saint-Louis,
the former capital and major urban pole in the rice production
zone of the SRV. The experiments were carried out during
November 2008–February 2009. Each experiment
lasted
5 days during which 10 experimental auction sessions were
conducted, each day one in the morning and one in the after-
noon. The market segment targeted in our consumer experi-
ment was female rice shoppers as women are the major
decision makers in households’ rice purchases in Senegal
(USAID, 2010) as well as in other rice consuming West-
African countries (Demont et al., 2012, 2013). The experi-
ments took place in two urban community centers, one at
500 m from the central market in Saint-Louis, and one on
the Tile`ne market, the primary market for local rice in Dakar
(USAID, 2010). For each session, 10 women were randomly
selected and recruited on the spot, most of whom were going
to or returning from the market. In order to include a random
factor during sampling, every third female passer-by with an
estimated age between 18 and 65 was approached. We told
participants they were going to participate in a two-hour mar-
ket test and receive a participation fee of 3000 FCFA ($6) “for
their taxi back home.” The latter pretext is commonly used in
Africa to detach pecuniary endowments from their “gift” or
“payment-for-service” context. It elegantly avoids the fee
being seen as a quid pro quo for which participants should
reciprocate (Lusk & Shogren, 2007), and which may bias the
bids (Loureiro, Umberger, & Hine, 2003).

We ran three auctions simultaneously and used the endow-
and-upgrade method with a ﬁxed benchmark following
Melton, Huﬀman, Shogren, and Fox (1996) and Roosen,
Fox, Hennessy, and Schreiber (1998). Each participant was en-
dowed with 1 kg of a “benchmark” rice and was presented
three times with the option to exchange this kilogram into
an alternative rice type. Lusk, Feldkamp, and Schroeder
(2004) noticed a diﬀerence in participants’ bids between multi-
ple-good and single-good valuation. We follow Alfnes and
Rickertsen (2003) who argue that bidding on all alternatives
simultaneously is an eﬃcient method for eliciting WTP diﬀer-
ences.

We purposely selected a “benchmark” rice and three alter-
native rice types available in the SRV such that they diﬀered
only in a bundle of quality attributes which are relevant to rice
value chain upgrading (Demont & Rizzotto, 2012; Demont
et al., 2013): (i) conventional SRV rice (benchmark), (ii) unla-
beled and (iii) labeled (RivalÒ) enhanced-quality SRV rice, and
(iv) labeled imported Thai rice. The benchmark is the standard
rice type which can be commonly found on the Saint-Louis

market (lower price curve in Figure 1) and is characterized
by a heterogeneous grain quality and a high level of foreign
matter (stones, husks, and dust). In terms of quality and price,
it is inferior to the three alternatives in the auction. The Thai
broken rice is the most commonly found imported rice type on
the market and has a grain quality somewhere between the
benchmark and the enhanced-quality SRV rice and contains
some impurities. The unlabeled and labeled rice types are iden-
tical, i.e., enhanced-quality SRV rice (Sahel 108 variety) which
was puriﬁed, carefully sifted, and branded and marketed as
RivalÒ. We presented the four rice types in four bags on a pre-
sentation table in the front part of a closed conference room in
the community center. Only the Thai and RivalÒ bags on the
presentation table were branded; the other rice types were pre-
sented in plain white bags. We told participants that rice types
(i), (ii), and (iii) were local and (iv) was imported. The rice
types were also presented on the participants’ tables in four
dishes, each one containing 1 kg of uncooked rice of each
type. Hence, the diﬀerence between (i) and (ii) is grain quality
(purity and homogeneity), the diﬀerence between (ii) and (iii)
is the mere presence of a local origin label and the diﬀerence
between (i) and (iv) is grain quality (purity and homogeneity)
and a foreign origin label.

We chose the Vickrey (1961) second-price auction mecha-
nism, because of its weakly dominant strategy for the partici-
pants to bid their true value for the good. Shogren, Margolis,
Koo, and List (2001) suggest that the random nth price auc-
tion works better for oﬀ-margin bidders than the second price
auction. However, in our context of low education levels (see
below) and high illiteracy, 5 we preferred the second-price auc-
tion mechanism, as it is easier to understand by the partici-
pants. We did not use any manuals or monitors and
conducted the experiment verbally in the national languages
Wolof with translations to French and Pulaar when necessary.
During the experiment, participants could examine the visual
(purity and homogeneity) and sensory (taste and aroma) qual-
ity attributes of the uncooked rice types.

We paid considerable attention to explaining the mechanism
and training participants in its procedure. Following Shogren,
Shin, Hayes, and Kliebenstein (1994), we used commonly
known brands of biscuits to familiarize the participants with
the Vickrey auction. Each participant received a small package
of biscuits and was asked to bid on two alternative, superior
types of biscuits. We conducted two rounds with an evaluation
after each round to check whether all participants understood
the system or whether more clariﬁcation was needed. We
learned from the trial session that WTP diﬀerence estimates
were more reliable after “calibration”; i.e., before the ﬁrst bid-
ding round we mentioned the absolute market price of the
benchmark rice (see further), but did not reveal, and asked
the participants not to reveal, any price information on the
alternative rice types. Secondly, we used the analogy of buying
new jewelry in exchange for old jewelry, where only the price
for “upgrading” is paid, a buying method commonly applied
by Senegalese women in the jewelry market. Both calibration
and the use of an analogy considerably accelerated the learn-
ing process of the endow-and-upgrade method.

Harrison, Harstad, and Rutstro¨ m (2004) state that multiple
trials with posted prices may inﬂuence bids and advise using
just one round of bidding or multiple trials without posting
prices. In the biscuit trials we posted prices to explain the auc-
tion mechanism, but during the rice auctions we did not reveal
any bidding information. We conducted two bidding rounds
separated by a within-subjects treatment in the form of a
sensory test, aimed at assessing the impact of post-cooking
quality attributes on WTP. During the sensory test, each

REVERSING URBAN BIAS IN AFRICAN RICE MARKETS: EVIDENCE FROM SENEGAL

67

participant was presented four dishes with cooked samples of
the four rice types and was asked to taste the rice types and
rinse her mouth between each tasting. This allowed partici-
pants to experience the sensory quality attributes (aroma,
taste, texture, and stickiness) and observe the swelling capacity
of the cooked rice types. To ensure equal sensory experience,
the rice representing unlabeled and RivalÒ rice was served
from the same cooking pot. At the end of the two rounds,
analogously to Roosen et al. (1998), we randomly selected
one product and one bidding round as binding. We explicitly
stated this during our introduction to avoid the substitution
eﬀect that could arise if participants could win more than
one product, which could in turn compromise bidding their
true value for the products. Finally, at the end of the experi-
ment we conducted a short survey through a one-page ques-
tionnaire to collect socio-demographic data. We planned the
survey after the auction experiment to avoid revealing too
much about the study’s objectives (Corrigan & Rousu, 2008).

(b) Methodology for analyzing the determinants of WTP

Haines, Guilkey, and Popkin (1988) argue that food con-
sumption decisions should be modeled as a two-stage process.
Participants ﬁrst decide whether they are willing to upgrade
their endowed kilogram of rice or not and if yes, they decide
next how much they are willing to add for the new product.
The double hurdle model introduced by Cragg (1971) correctly
represents this two-stage decision process.

Let mijpr be the variable representing the desirability of
upgrading an endowed kilogram of rice and let WTPijpr be
the amount spent on the purchase by the ith consumer
(i = 1, . . ., 10) in the jth session (j = 1, . . ., 10) for the pth rice
type (p = imported, non-labeled, labeled) in the rth bidding
round (r = 0 before tasting, r = 1 after tasting):
ð1Þ
mijpr ¼ a0xijpr þ uij þ vijpr
ð2Þ
WTP ijpr ¼ a0xijpr þ uij þ vijpr
where xijpr is a vector of independent variables including two
product dummy variables (imported and labeled) identifying
the three alternative rice types (unlabeled is set as the refer-
ence), a dummy variable for the bidding round, the time of
the day (1 = morning; 0 = afternoon), a dummy variable for
the market (1 = Saint-Louis; 0 = Dakar) and a vector of so-
cio-demographic variables xv (v = 1, . . ., s = 14), a is a con-
formable vector of coeﬃcients, uij is an individual speciﬁc
disturbance for participant i in session j, and vijpr is the overall
error term.

Following Cragg (1971), WTPijpr is the consumers’ bid to
upgrade the mediocre-quality benchmark rice to any of the
three alternatives. The ﬁrst hurdle is the consumer’s decision
of whether or not to pay for the three alternatives. The prob-
ability of the respondent choosing not to bid a positive
amount (WTPijpr = 0) is expressed by:
ProbðWTP ijpr ¼ 0Þ ¼ Uð a1xijprÞ
ð3Þ
where U is the standard normal density function. The second
hurdle determines the eﬀect of independent variables on
WTPijpr, given WTPijpr > 0. The distribution of WTPijpr con-
ditional on being positive is truncated at zero and assumed
normal with mean a0
2xijpr and variance r2. The second hurdle
is formulated as:
fðWTP ijprjWTP ijpr > 0Þ ¼ ð1=rÞU½ðWTP ijpr   a0
2xijpr=rÞ

2xijprÞ=r

Uða0

ð4Þ

where U is the standard normal density function and a2 is a
vector of coeﬃcients.

4. RESULTS

(a) Descriptive statistics

Table 1 reports some key summary statistics of the socio-
demographic characteristics of the two samples of female rice
shoppers. With the exception of three socio-demographic vari-
ables, i.e., household size, group membership, and awareness,
the Dakar and Saint-Louis samples do not signiﬁcantly diﬀer.
Women were on average 37 years old. The majority had com-
pleted primary school or had not followed any formal educa-
tion. 6 A third of the women were small traders, a quarter were
employed, and the rest were housewives or students. The aver-
age monthly household earnings were more than 150,000
FCFA (US$300) and a quarter of the women had a cooking
housemaid. The average time spent on dinner preparation,
including going to the market, preparation, and actual cook-
ing, was more than four hours each day. Household sizes
and group membership rates were signiﬁcantly smaller in Da-
kar than in Saint-Louis, probably due to the more individual-
istic lifestyle prevailing in the capital compared to the more
traditional northern provincial towns. Finally, awareness of
the existence of enhanced-quality SRV rice was signiﬁcantly
higher in Saint-Louis (82%) than in Dakar (53%), which is
in line with the survey of Fall, Fall, Gningue, Ndir, and Ndour
(2007) who observed that the awareness of local rice is quite
high in the areas close to production zones.

(b) Determinants of WTP

Table 2 displays and compares the mean bids among the rice
types in Saint-Louis and Dakar before and after the sensory
test. Due to the use of the endow-and-upgrade method, bids
have to be interpreted as diﬀerences in WTP between the
benchmark rice, priced at 300 FCFA/kg (US$0.60/kg) during
the period of November 2008–February 2009, and an alterna-
tive rice type. Due to the mass of bids of zero FCFA, we also
calculated the mean of all positive bids. Average individual
positive bids ranged from 86 to 165 FCFA/kg (US$0.17–
0.33/kg), depending on the product, the market, and the bid-
ding round. They drop after the sensory test while at the same
time the number of zero bids increases. Mean post-sensory
bids for imported rice in Saint-Louis suggest price premiums
of 18% relative to the benchmark SRV rice, which are consis-
tent with the premiums observed on the Saint-Louis market
averaging 15% (Figure 1). The data further suggest that, if
quality is enhanced and tailored to consumers, price premiums
for SRV rice may be twice as large (30–34%) on this market.
Price premiums seem to be lower in Dakar.

Results of the double hurdle model are presented in Table 3.
The ﬁrst column shows the eﬀect of rice characteristics and
consumer demographics on the probability that the consumer
will upgrade conventional SRV rice to enhanced-quality rice,
while the determinants of the WTP to upgrade conventional
SRV rice to enhanced-quality rice are presented in the second
column. The results reveal four major ﬁndings with important
policy and marketing implications which are discussed in Sec-
tion 5. First, participants were 43% more likely to upgrade to
quality SRV rice than to imported rice, which they further dis-
counted by 45 FCFA/kg (US$0.09/kg). They were further
willing to add a small price premium of 17 FCFA/kg
for RivalÒ, compared to unlabeled quality
(US$0.03/kg)

68

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

Table 1. Descriptive statistics of female rice shoppers’ socio-demographic characteristics in the sample

Variable

Description

Age (years)

Age
Household income Monthly income (1000 FCFAa)
Household size
Cooking housemaid
Information
Group membership
Trader
Housewife
Employed
Student
Daily
Education
Higher education
Indigenous
Cooking time
Awareness

Number of individuals in household
1 = has a cooking housemaid; 0 = otherwise
1 = received information on SRV rice; 0 = otherwise
1 = member of a group; 0 = otherwise
1 = trader as profession; 0 = otherwise
1 = housewife; 0 = otherwise
1 = employed; 0 = otherwise
1 = student; 0 = otherwise
1 = daily rice purchase; 0 = otherwise
0 = none; 1 = primary; 2 = secondary; 3 = tertiary
1 = secondary and tertiary; 0 = otherwise
1 = indigenous (Wolof, Pulaar); 0 = otherwise
Total time (h) spent on preparing lunch (going to the market, preparation and cooking)
1 = awareness of local quality rice; 0 = otherwise
No. of participants

Saint-Louis

Dakar

Mean

SD Mean

SD

11.99
110
5.44
0.39
0.50
0.50
0.47
0.46
0.41
0.24
0.44
1.11
0.45
0.42
1.10
0.38

36.60
145
10.23
0.18
0.58
0.46
0.32
0.30
0.21
0.06
0.27
1.18
0.27
0.77
4.30
0.82b
99c

38.26
170
8.60*
0.29
0.65
0.22*
0.33
0.26
0.27
0.09
0.26
1.51
0.38
0.66
4.06
0.53*
100

11.85
112
4.48
0.45
0.48
0.42
0.47
0.45
0.45
0.14
0.44
1.31
0.49
0.48
1.10
0.50

* Denotes statistical signiﬁcance of the diﬀerence at the 5% level based on a t-test.
a The exchange rate during November 2008–February 2009 was US$1 = 502 FCFA.
b Based on a sample size of 79 participants as during the ﬁrst two sessions in Saint-Louis this question was not yet included.
c One of the women participated twice, thus we canceled the results of her second participation.

Table 2. Descriptive statistics of consumers’ WTP to upgrade conventional SRV rice to alternative rice types

Rice type

Saint-Louis

Dakar

Mean of all bids (FCFA)

Positive bids (%)

Mean of positive bids (FCFA)

Pre-sensory

Post-sensory

Pre-sensory

Post-sensory

Mean

68
125
132

51
81
80

134
155
165

SD

97
109
116

98
100
107

Mean

53
90
103

43
70
67

122
129
154

SD

80
91
117

80
83
112

Mean

30
97
114

29
80
83

104
122
136

SD

57
85
89

62
78
80

Mean

22
78
88

26
67
72

86
116
123

SD

46
82
84

52
74
74

Imported
Unlabeled
Labeled

Imported
Unlabeled
Labeled

Imported
Unlabeled
Labeled

The price of
US$1 = 502 FCFA.

the benchmark rice was about 300 FCFA/kg (US$0.60/kg) during November 2008–February 2009 at an exchange rate of

SRV rice. If we calibrate these econometric coeﬃcients to mar-
ket prices, we ﬁnd that urban consumers are willing to pay
price premiums of 35% for quality rice and 41% for branded
quality rice such as RivalÒ. 7 The price of RivalÒ at the level
of the milling factories in the SRV (at 50 km from Saint-
Louis) was 300 FCFA/kg (US$0.60/kg) in 2008–2009. Given
that manual cleaning, puriﬁcation, and homogenization of rice
was done at the Saint-Louis market at 7–13% of the price of
conventional SRV rice, our econometric results suggest that
value chain initiators have some price ﬂexibility for introduc-
ing branded quality SRV rice on urban Senegalese markets
and capturing part of the consumer surplus, particularly in
Saint-Louis where quality premiums are 50 FCFA (US$0.10/
kg) higher than in Dakar (Table 3).

Secondly, the likelihood of upgrading from the benchmark
rice to any of the alternative rice types is 13% lower after tast-
ing and the WTP drops at the same time with 25 FCFA/kg
(US$0.05/kg). Several participants told us that if it is eaten

without any supplements, the benchmark rice tastes better be-
cause of its mixed grain (broken, intermediate, and long) com-
position. Some of
the participants considered the mixed
composition as a plus because through sifting, they can obtain
diﬀerent grain types from a single rice product. Moreover, as
this rice type needs to be puriﬁed before cooking, it was less
discounted in cooked form than in non-cooked form. This
ﬁnding indicates the existence of a price sensitive market seg-
ment of consumers with limited time constraints who may pre-
fer the cheap mediocre-quality rice, despite the additional
work it involves during preparation. After all, we must not
forget that in Saint-Louis a large part of the population has
been exposed to the benchmark rice for a very long time and
is used to its visual, sensory, and cooking characteristics.
However, although it performs well when consumed without
supplements, it is important to note that the heterogeneous
grain quality of the benchmark rice is less suitable for ce´e´bu
je¨n (literally “rice with ﬁsh”), the most important dish in

REVERSING URBAN BIAS IN AFRICAN RICE MARKETS: EVIDENCE FROM SENEGAL

69

Table 3. Determinants of consumers’ WTP to upgrade conventional SRV rice to alternative rice types

Independent variables

First hurdle: probability of upgrading

Morning
Importedb
Labeledb
Post-tasting
Saint-Louis
Awareness
Age
Household income
Household size
Indigenous
Higher education
Daily
Employed
Trader
Housewife
Student
Cooking housemaid
Cooking time
Group membership
Constant
Sigmac
Log pseudolikelihood
No. of observations

SEa

0.149
0.103
0.060
0.073
0.163
0.170
0.007
0.001
0.017
0.166
0.166
0.180
0.394
0.378
0.381
0.450
0.183
0.062
0.172
0.580

Coeﬃcient
0.486***
 1.153***
0.037
 0.338***
 0.123
0.440***
 0.018***
 0.001
 0.007
 0.040
0.391**
 0.084
 0.356
 0.251
 0.378
 0.314
 0.012
0.029
0.152
1.249**
 581.504

1068

Marginal eﬀect

0.183***
 0.433***
0.014
 0.128***
 0.047
0.170**
 0.007***
 0.000
 0.003
 0.015
0.144**
 0.032
 0.138
 0.096
 0.146
 0.123
 0.005
0.011
0.057

 3643.843

640

Second hurdle: amount paid
SEa

Coeﬃcient

15.293

 44.652***
17.159***
 25.046**
49.848*
 4.937
 0.781
0.033
1.097
 24.979
 19.564
 0.848
17.749
34.893
31.202
44.200
30.713
0.721
 9.872
89.965

100.400***

17.168
12.415
6.183
11.166
21.897
17.866
0.759
0.093
1.912
18.910
21.462
19.104
28.409
28.917
27.327
39.574
23.333
9.235
19.724
54.951
8.661

the benchmark rice was about 300 FCFA/kg (US$0.60/kg) during November 2008–February 2009 at an exchange rate of

The price of
US$1 = 502 FCFA.
a Standard errors are robust and cluster corrected.
b The coeﬃcient of this dummy has to be interpreted as relative to the reference, i.e., unlabeled rice.
c Sigma is the error variance.
* Denotes statistical signiﬁcance at the 10% level.
** Denotes statistical signiﬁcance at the 5% level.
*** Denotes statistical signiﬁcance at the 1% level.

Senegal which is based on 100% broken rice (Dieng, 2012). In
other words, by not including any supplements our sensory
test may have favored grain heterogeneity, while grain homo-
geneity is the dominant quality criterion in Senegal due to the
importance of the national ce´e´bu je¨n dish (Fall et al., 2007).

Thirdly, conducting the experiment in the morning increases
the buying probability by 18%. Our results are consistent with
similar ﬁndings in Benin (Demont et al., 2012), and suggest
that time of day aﬀects valuation of rice in the Senegalese con-
text. For most participants, the morning sessions meant an
interruption in their daily routine of going to the market
and preparing ce´ e´ bu je¨n for lunch (Fall et al., 2007; USAID,
2010). Those still having rice purchases in mind, may value
rice more than those in the afternoon who just had their lunch
and completed all daily rice purchases in the morning. 8

Finally and most importantly for marketing research is our
ﬁnding that consumers familiar with enhanced-quality SRV
rice were 17% more likely to purchase it; those unfamiliar with
its characteristics were signiﬁcantly more reluctant to buy it.
Heinemann, Behrens, and Lanfer-Marquez (2006) found sim-
ilar evidence in Brazil; the majority of consumers in Sa˜o Paulo
did not reject the parboiled rice solely based on its sensory
properties, but for not being familiar with it and so, unaware
of its characteristics and advantages. Moreover, in our sample
younger and more educated women were more likely to try out
enhanced-quality SRV rice than older and less educated wo-
men. A parallel can be drawn with classical ﬁndings in the
adoption literature showing that younger and better educated
farmers have a higher likelihood to adopt new technologies
(e.g., Chianu & Tsujii, 2005; Demont & Stessens, 2009).

5. POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS

(a) Investment in post-harvest rice quality tailored to urban

consumer standards

In Section 1, we advanced the proposition that research ef-
forts should be directed to non-price characteristics of rice.
Our ﬁeld experiments have shown that the majority of Sene-
galese consumers are willing to pay quality premiums for local
rice and are further adding premiums for a local rice brand.
This suggests that the persistent consumer preferences for im-
ported rice observed on the market (Figure 1) have less to do
with the product’s foreignness (Opoku & Akorli, 2009) than
with its superior post-harvest grain quality (Seck et al.,
2010). Owing to a large percentage of foreign matter and
low levels of post-harvest grading and sorting, local rice fails
to meet expectations concerning reduced workload and time
spent on sorting and cooking rice, and hence falls short rela-
tive to imported rice in this convenience dimension. The main
policy lesson that can be drawn from these ﬁndings is that the
ﬁrst priority in the reversal of urban bias’ footprint on Sene-
galese rice markets is the investment in post-harvest quality
tailored to urban consumer standards. Very little research
has been conducted on non-price characteristics, consumer
preferences and response to quality of rice in West Africa
(Demont et al., 2012, 2013; Tomlins, Manful, Gayin,
Kudjawu, & Tamakloe, 2007; Tomlins, Manful, Larwer, &
Hammond, 2005). Unnevehr (1986) observed high returns to
research for quality-enhancing R&D in Southeast Asia, which
is consistent with evidence from Benin and Nigeria revealing

70

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

that quality is important in the demand for rice, even for the
poor (Demont et al., 2012; Erhabor & Ojogho, 2011).

We can categorize rice quality criteria in three main groups:
(i) physical characteristics of the grain (form, length, and col-
or), (ii) market presentation (cleanliness, absence of outer
corps, aroma, degree of breaking, and price), and (iii) post-
cooking and sensory characteristics (swelling capacity, taste,
texture, and cohesion of the grains after cooking). Surveys re-
veal that the most important consumer determinants for rice
in Senegal are taste, swelling capacity, ease of cooking, and
the form of the grain (Fall & Diagne, 2008; Fall et al., 2007;
USAID, 2010). But also proper post-harvest processing can
add value to the product and is important for consumers;
cleanliness, absence of outer corps, and grain homogeneity
were consistently mentioned as important criteria. Price, in
contrast, had a limited inﬂuence on consumer preferences,
which is consistent with the literature reviewed in the Intro-
duction.

Consumers’ pre-sensory bids suggest that there are two ma-
jor market segments of rice consumers: (i) a segment of older,
less educated, and less aware (Table 3) “non-upgraders,” i.e.,
consumers who prefer conventional SRV rice to all upgrades
(14% of the population); and (ii) a segment of younger, more
educated, and more aware consumers who are willing to up-
grade from conventional to any rice with superior quality
(86% of population). Of this second market segment, more
than half of the consumers (47% of population) are no longer
willing to upgrade to imported rice after being exposed to
quality SRV rice, while almost no consumers (1% of popula-
tion) are only willing to upgrade to imported rice and not to
quality SRV rice. These results are strikingly similar to ﬁnd-
ings in Ghana and suggest that they may be applicable to a
wider range of rice-producing countries in West-Africa. Tom-
lins et al. (2005), for example, observed that although 86% of
Ghanaian consumers preferred imported rice to that produced
locally (similar to our second market segment), due to the
poor quality of local rice, there exists a niche market segment
of 14% of older consumers with a clear preference for tradi-
tional local rice (similar to our ﬁrst market segment). They ar-
gued that improved local rice might appeal more to younger
consumers who are most demanding with respect to quality
(similar to the consumers in our second market segment).

The average quality premium of 35% elicited through our
experiments indicates that investment in post-harvest quality
tailored to urban consumer standards can render local SRV
rice competitive with imported rice. Post-harvest quality infra-
structure is currently insuﬃcient in order to meet the demand
for quality rice; most quality rice is currently obtained through
manual, post-harvest operations (cleaning, sifting, and sort-
ing). Areas of investment that need attention are enhanced
(i) milling, (ii) cleaning, (iii) sorting, and (iv) drying infrastruc-
ture. Our experimental data show that investors in rice value
chain upgrading have some price ﬂexibility for introducing
quality SRV rice in urban markets and recovering their invest-
ment by capturing part of the consumer surplus. However, the
drop of the propensity of upgrading after sensory experience—
a proxy for repeat purchase intentions—suggests that there
may be limits to post-harvest grain quality upgrading, i.e.,
striving for visual post-harvest quality attributes, such as vari-
etal and grain homogeneity, may come at the cost of sensory
quality. 9 Moreover, the existence of a 14% market segment
of non-upgraders (conventional SRV rice consumers) suggests
that any strategy of value chain upgrading to increase food
security for the poor should serve both market segments,
i.e., conventional and quality rice, in order to consider the
trade-oﬀ between adding value and maintaining aﬀordability

(Tomlins et al., 2007). Value needs to be added in order to
make local rice competitive to imported rice and enable
SRV rice farmers to serve urban markets, while at the same
time cheap rice needs to be available for price sensitive con-
sumers.

(b) Labeling and branding

The market provision of quality is notoriously fraught with
diﬃculties under asymmetric information: when producers
cannot credibly signal the quality of their products, consum-
ers’ choices are predicated on the perceived average quality
on the market, and this pooling equilibrium leads to market
failures with undesirable welfare properties. Labeling and
branding can be used as institutions for counteracting the
eﬀects of quality uncertainty as they not only indicate quality
but also give the consumer a means of retaliation if the quality
does not meet expectations (Akerlof, 1970). It has been estab-
lished that origin and quality labeling entail market diﬀerenti-
ation potential, which might be noticeable for consumers
depending on what the labels appeal to (e.g., health, safety,
taste diﬀerentiation) (Verbeke and Roosen, 2009).

Country-of-origin labeling (COOL) can serve as an extrinsic
cue that supplements the use of intrinsic quality cues. Dichter
(1962) was the ﬁrst to argue that COOL may have a “tremen-
dous inﬂuence on the acceptance and success of products” (p.
116). However, systematic research on the eﬀect of COOL be-
gan with the publication of Schooler’s (1965) seminal article
on product bias in the Central American Common Market.
Diﬀerent attempts have been made in the literature to analyze
the generalizability of the eﬀect of COOL through meta-anal-
ysis (Bilkey & Nes, 1982; Peterson & Jolibert, 1995; Verlegh &
Steenkamp, 1999). Bilkey and Nes (1982) noted a number of
serious methodological shortcomings in COOL research.
Obermiller and Spangenberg (1989) proposed the ﬁrst theoret-
ical framework for analyzing the eﬀects of COOL, identifying
three types of processes: cognitive, aﬀective, and normative.
Han (1989) proposed that COOL could serve as a summary in-
dex or heuristic that reduces the amount of information pro-
cessing required in making a decision. In their meta-analysis,
Peterson and Jolibert (1995) found that country of origin ex-
plained approximately 26% of the observed variance of con-
sumer perceptions and intentions. Verlegh and Steenkamp
(1999) use the theoretical framework of Obermiller and Span-
genberg (1989) and provide the most comprehensive meta-
analysis on COOL eﬀects to date, testing seven of the most
widely researched hypotheses on COOL eﬀects. Relevant to
our research question is the evidence they provide supporting
their fourth hypothesis that COOL eﬀects are larger when sub-
jects are asked to compare products from more developed
economies with products from less developed economies.

Recently, the attention of researchers has shifted from
COOL to the use of geographical indications (GIs) by produc-
ers’ cooperative action in the provision of quality to achieve
the critical mass required for brand name and trademark
development. Interest in GIs increased considerably after they
were recognized as a distinct form of intellectual property (IP)
rights in the TRIPS agreement of the World Trade Organiza-
tion (WTO) (Josling, 2006). In the context of GIs, quality
attributes of interest to consumers are presumed linked to
the speciﬁc geographic origin 10 of the good and/or particular
production methods used in that region (the notion of “terr-
oir”), and such attributes cannot be determined through
inspection by the consumer prior to purchasing the good.
The fundamental role of GIs in this setting, therefore, is that
of providing a credible certiﬁcation mechanism that solves a

REVERSING URBAN BIAS IN AFRICAN RICE MARKETS: EVIDENCE FROM SENEGAL

71

real-world information problem (Moschini, Menapace, &
Pick, 2008).

We did not ﬁnd any experimental evidence in support of the
hypothesis that Senegalese consumers prefer imported rice for
reasons that go beyond quality, e.g., due to its additional
dimension of “foreignness” (Batra et al., 2000; Opoku &
Akorli, 2009). As a matter of fact, only a negligible market
segment of 1% of consumers chose imported rice as their
exclusive upgrade. Moreover, we found that the local GI label
RivalÒ (literally “Rice of the Valley”) added 6% to the value of
enhanced-quality SRV rice. Similar positive response to GIs
was observed in Ghana (Tomlins et al., 2005), which suggests
that branding of local rice through GIs can further contribute
to the reversal of urban bias in African rice markets. Branding
of local rice only pays oﬀ in countries where a signiﬁcantly
large segment of consumers purchases rice bags (instead of
purchasing rice by the kilogram),
in Senegal.
Therefore, value chain initiators should not refrain from
investing in rice brands with local appeal in order to compete
against imported rice brands and gain market share in urban
markets.

such as

(c) Generic advertising

Norman, Pepall, and Richards (2008) argue that advertising
can be treated in two ways. On the one hand, it can be treated
as a complement to the product being marketed that aﬀects the
demand for goods without changing the underlying prefer-
ences of consumers. Consumers may place a greater value
on a product the greater the advertising is of that product be-
cause they enjoy knowing that the product they buy is widely
recognized by lots of others on television, in movies, and on
billboards. For example, consumers may gain from knowing
that when they serve their friends local rice for lunch their
friends will know through advertising that it is “in” to eat local
rice. Advertising raises consumer WTP because it adds recog-
nition and prestige to the basic product. In this case, advertis-
ing “builds value.” On the other hand, advertising can serve as
a complement to the basic good. Advertising can inform con-
sumers either about the product’s existence or how to use the
product more eﬀectively. In this case, the complementary func-
tion of advertising is informational. Advertising works in this
context to extend the appeal or “reach” of the product.
Norman et al. (2008) further demonstrate that a change in
advertising will alter output but not price in the “extending
reach” case. On the other hand, the eﬀect of advertising in
the “building value” case aﬀects price but not output.

We did not ﬁnd any experimental evidence which supports
the idea that the persistent preference gap between imported
and local rice (Figure 1) is a result of perceived diﬀerences in
image of the product or its origin. However, the post-auction
survey did reveal a signiﬁcant awareness gap in that 18–45% of
urban consumers were not aware of the existence of enhanced-
quality SRV rice (Table 1). Similarly, surveys point out that
45% of the stakeholders in the Senegalese rice sector cite the
lack of visibility, due to the absence of a marketing strategy,
as one of the reasons of the limited uptake of local rice by ur-
ban consumers (Fall et al., 2007). A lack of marketing means a
lack of notoriety, which also shows a lack of eﬀective political
communication advertising SRV rice. The majority of partici-
pants in our experiments (58–65%) had received information
on SRV rice, mostly through TV and radio (Table 1), but
the content of this information was limited to the presentation
of the GOANA program and did not contain any advertise-
ment on SRV rice. Hence, the type of advertising that will
be most needed, once the sector suﬃciently increases its scale,

is the “extending reach” type. Before arriving at that point,
any strategy of value chain upgrading to increase food security
for the poor in Senegal must ﬁrst build value through invest-
ment in quality in order to make SRV rice competitive to im-
ported rice. Only after the industry is able to achieve a critical
quality standard, it can successfully scale up quality produce
and rely on advertising in order to extend reach to a wide base
of consumer segments and gain market share in urban markets
(Demont & Rizzotto, 2012).

Since women are the major decision makers in rice purchas-
ing in Senegal (Fall & Diagne, 2008; Fall et al., 2007), adver-
tising eﬀorts might be more successful if focused on women.
Moreover, urban markets are the most important target pop-
ulations because they represent roughly 65% of rice consumers
(Fall & Diagne, 2008). As the awareness gap (Table 1) is sig-
niﬁcantly higher in Dakar (47%) than in Saint-Louis (18%),
signiﬁcantly more promotion eﬀorts should be invested in Da-
kar. Our econometric results show that making consumers
aware about the existence of an enhanced-quality rice product
on the market may increase the likelihood of purchasing and
hence the market share, not necessarily the WTP for the prod-
uct (Table 3). These ﬁndings are consistent with Norman
et al’s. (2008) “extending reach” case. In that case, the value
of promotion for consumers in these markets is the mere pro-
vision of information. This suggests that advertising is an
important complement to investment in quality and branding
in the reversal of urban bias.

Our results further suggest that generic advertising eﬀorts
such as messages during television programs, radio programs
and taste booths on the markets should be executed in the
morning when women exhibit a higher propensity to try out
new rice products (Table 3). The weekly morning cooking
and fashion program FAM (Femme Africaine Moderne) on
the Senegalese television channel 2STV, for example, could
be an outlet for regular broadcasts on special recipes based
on local rice. Moreover, the success of the benchmark rice
when cooked without supplements in our experiments ad-
vances the idea that generic advertising strategies should be
designed according to the target dish for which the rice type
is used and should play an informative role as a complement
to the product itself. A good example is the cookbook with
recipes based on local rice published by the Senegalese Insti-
tute for Food Technology (ITA) (Gning, Doumouya, Diouf,
& Aw, 2007).

(d) Value chain upgrading: a role for the public sector?

The policy recommendations presented in the previous sec-
tions can be embedded in a broader framework of value chain
upgrading. Establishing eﬃcient value chains, i.e., vertical alli-
ances between independent business organizations within a
supply chain (Hobbs, Cooney, & Fulton, 2000), is cited by
the World Bank as a ﬁrst policy objective in making agricul-
ture in developing countries more competitive and more eﬀec-
tive in supporting sustainable growth and reducing poverty
(World Bank, 2008, pp. 19, 228). In order to upgrade rice va-
lue chains in Senegal, three areas of investment are needed,
i.e., (i) investment in post-harvest product-quality infrastruc-
ture (enhanced milling, cleaning, sorting, and drying infra-
structure) in order to upgrade quality of local rice to urban
consumer standards, (ii) investment in productivity, aggrega-
tion, and storage infrastructure in order to scale-up quality
produce of local rice, and (iii) investment in advertising and
generic promotion in order to raise awareness of local quality
rice and reverse urban bias’ footprint in rice markets (Demont
& Rizzotto, 2012).

72

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

Branding and labeling are an integral part of value chain
upgrading and innovation. Quality standards, certiﬁcation
and quality control become more relevant as value chains
move from being supplier-driven to increasingly buyer-driven
(ACI, 2005). COOL or GIs such as RivalÒ can serve as (collec-
tive) quality certiﬁcation devices, although for their function
to be credible additional promotion and certiﬁcation costs
are required. Because COOL or GI certiﬁcation entails ﬁxed
costs shared by all producers of the high quality good, there
are external economies of scale at the industry level and the
competitive equilibrium is not Pareto eﬃcient and underpro-
vides the high quality good (Moschini et al., 2008). Likewise,
small ﬁrms cannot aﬀord mass media promotion campaigns
and therefore depend on generic promotion of their country
and region of origin. The public good nature of generic pro-
motion is such that there is underinvestment unless these activ-
ities are funded collectively (Zhao, Anderson, & Wittwer,
2003). Hence, both certiﬁcation and generic promotion should
be subsidized by the public sector.

But also on a broader level, government has an important
role to play in coordinating the development of food value
chains. As the large multiplier eﬀects of agriculture to broader
growth and poverty reduction are externalities to the sector it-
self, the private sector will typically underinvest relative to the
social optimum. Moreover, the pervasive nature of market
failures and distortions in underdeveloped agriculture (Binsw-
anger & Deininger, 1997) justify a judicious and quite exten-
sive agricultural policy including direct and indirect support
for agricultural research, extension, quality management, gen-
eric promotion, information provision, infrastructural invest-
ment, and human capital development.

6. CONCLUSION

Some African governments now recognize they must invest
in agriculture in order to reverse urban bias, but often forget
the equally important objective of investing in quality tailored
to consumers, so as to reverse urban bias’ footprint on food
markets. Our ﬁeld experiments suggest that Senegalese con-
sumers’ preference for imported rice is primarily due to the
product’s superior grain quality and that consumers are will-
ing to pay quality premiums for local rice. This suggests that
investment in post-harvest grain quality tailored to consumers
in urban rice markets—in order to enable local rice to compete
against imported rice—is the ﬁrst step that needs to be under-

taken in the reversal of urban bias’ footprint on Senegalese
rice markets. Branding and advertising can further contribute
to the reversal of urban bias as consumers are willing to pay
price premiums for a local rice brand and awareness of local
quality rice increases the likelihood of paying quality premi-
ums. This provides useful information for generic promotion
programs that need to accompany food self-suﬃciency pro-
grams, which aim to reverse urban bias.

Our experimental evidence suggests that value chain initia-
tors have some ﬂexibility for introducing branded quality rice
in urban markets. Nevertheless, the existence of a small mar-
ket segment of older, less educated, and less aware consumers
who are not willing to pay quality premiums suggests that any
strategy of value chain upgrading to increase food security for
the poor should serve both market segments and supply a wide
range of quality-diﬀerentiated local rice products. We expect
that once post-harvest product-quality infrastructure is up-
graded, investment in productivity, aggregation, storage infra-
structure, advertising, and generic promotion will be more
eﬀective in reversing urban bias than past productivist at-
tempts.

Finally, focusing on food quality standards in a food inse-
cure country may seem counterintuitive at ﬁrst. However,
one of the causes of Africa’s food insecurity is the lack of com-
petitiveness of domestic rice vis a` vis imported rice due, in part,
to quality issues. Nearly 40% of the rice consumed in Africa is
imported. That is about one third of all rice traded in world
markets. With such high dependence on imports, Africa is
highly exposed to international market shocks, sometimes
with grave consequences for its food security and political sta-
bility as attested by events during the 2008 food crisis (Becker
& Yoboue´, 2009; Moseley et al., 2010; Seck et al., 2010).
Greater dependence on local rice markets will make the local
food economy less vulnerable to the vagaries of international
rice markets—although, more vulnerable to domestic weather
ﬂuctuations and production risks such as pest outbreaks (de
Mey, Demont, & Diagne, 2012). Nevertheless,
increasing
dependency on locally grown crops will strengthen the liveli-
hoods of rural producers and will raise rural household food
security. If Africa wants to reduce import dependency, it will
have to invest in value-adding by tailoring quality of its
domestically produced rice to urban consumer standards—or
in the words of Moseley et al. (2010)—“the current concern
for increased rice production [. . .] is more about helping urban
consumers than rural producers” (p. 5779).

NOTES

1. Because of its dominant market share, e.g., 73% in Dakar (USAID,
2010), in this study we focus on broken rice, termed simply “rice” hereafter
for brevity.

In 2007, PINORD marketed 500 tons of milled RivalÒ, produced by
2.
10 RMEs. This amount rose to 5,000–6,000 tons in 2008 involving
108 RMEs, 7,000–8,000 tons in 2009 involving 150 RMEs, and
12,000 tons in 2010 involving 300 RMEs. This represents only 3% of an
estimated available production of 359,000 tons of milled rice in the SRV
in 2010–2011 (ANSD, 2011). In 2011–2012, no RivalÒ was commercialized
due to discontinued external funding.

3. Shogren et al. (1994) describe the basic procedure. See Lusk and
Shogren (2007) for an extensive review of the methodology.

4. See Harrison and List (2004) for a classiﬁcation of experiments in
empirical economics literature.

5. The illiteracy rate among Senegalese women amounts to 67% (ANSD,
2012).

6. These data are consistent with larger and demographic surveys
(ANSD, 2008a, 2008b; Fall & Diagne, 2008; USAID, 2010).

7. Prices recorded on the urban Saint-Louis market in November 2008
were 300 FCFA/kg (US$0.60/kg) for conventional SRV rice (benchmark)
and 360 FCFA/kg (€0.55/kg) for Thai 100% broken rice. The price
premium for quality rice = (360 + 45   300)/300 = 35% and the price
premium for branded quality rice = (360 + 45 + 17   300)/300 = 41%.

REVERSING URBAN BIAS IN AFRICAN RICE MARKETS: EVIDENCE FROM SENEGAL

73

8. More than a quarter of the women purchase rice on a daily basis
(Table 1). In later experimental auctions, we included three additional
questions in the questionnaire, i.e., whether women were hungry at the
time of the experiment, the time since their last meal and whether they had
been interrupted in their daily activities of preparing lunch or dinner.
However, none of these variables did a better job in the econometric model
in explaining the morning eﬀect than the “morning” dummy itself. This
may suggest that the morning eﬀect may be caused by a hitherto
unidentiﬁed variable, which happens to be strongly correlated with the
morning dummy. Further research is needed to determine the psycholog-
ical causes of this phenomenon in the African context.

9. The uniform decrease of the WTP for all alternative rice types suggests
an increase of the WTP for the benchmark rice, which has been conﬁrmed
in later experimental auctions in which we used imported rice as a
benchmark.

10.
If the geographic area encompasses a whole country, GI labeling is
equivalent to COOL and the latter can be interpreted as a subset of the
former.

REFERENCES

ACI (2005). Northeast Thailand rice value chain study. Policy Brief Series.

Maryland, USA: Agrifood Consulting International.

Akerlof, G. A. (1970). The market for “lemons”: Quality uncertainty and
the market mechanism. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84(3),
488–500.

Akindes, F. (1999). Food strategies of urban households in Coˆte d’Ivoire
following the 1994 CFA franc devaluation. Food Policy, 24(5),
479–493.

Alfnes, F., & Rickertsen, K. (2003). European consumers’ willingness to
pay for US beef in experimental auction markets. American Journal of
Agricultural Economics, 85(2), 396–405.

ANSD (2008a). Situation e´conomique et social de la re´gion de Dakar de
l’anne´ e 2007. Agence Nationale de la Statistique et de la De´mographie
(ANSD): Dakar, Senegal.

ANSD (2008b). Situation e´conomique et social de la re´gion de Saint-Louis.
Agence Nationale de la Statistique et de la De´mographie (ANSD):
Dakar, Senegal.

ANSD (2011). Situation e´conomique et sociale du Se´ne´gal en. Agence
Nationale de la Statistique et de la De´mographie (ANSD): Dakar,
Senegal.

ANSD (2012). Agence Nationale de la Statistique et de la De´ mographie

(ANSD). Retrieved from http://www.ansd.sn/.

Arnould, E. J. (1989). Toward a broadened theory of preference formation
and the diﬀusion of innovations: Cases from Zinder Province, Niger
Republic. Journal of Consumer Research, 16(2), 239–267.

Barrett, C. B. (2008). Smallholder market participation: Concepts and
evidence from eastern and southern Africa. Food Policy, 33(4),
299–317.

Batra, R., Ramaswamy, V., Alden, D. L., Steenkamp, J.-B. E. M., &
Ramachander, S. (2000). Eﬀects of brand local and nonlocal origin on
consumer attitudes in developing countries. Journal of Consumer
Psychology, 9(2), 83–95.

Becker, L., & Yoboue´, N. (2009). Rice producer–processor networks in

Coˆte d’Ivoire. Geographical Review, 99(2), 164–185.

de Mey, Y., Demont, M., & Diagne, M. (2012). Estimating bird damage to
rice in Africa: Evidence from the Senegal River Valley. Journal of
Agricultural Economics, 63(1), 175–200.

Demont, M., Rutsaert, P., Ndour, M., Verbeke, W., Seck, P. A., &
Tollens, E. (2013). Experimental auctions, collective induction and
choice shift: Willingness-to-pay for rice quality in Senegal. European
Review of Agricultural Economics, in press.

Demont, M., & Rizzotto, A. C. (2012). Policy sequencing and the
development of rice value chains in Senegal. Development Policy
Review, 30(4), 451–472.

Demont, M., & Stessens, J. (2009). Food versus cash: Development theory
and reality in northern Coˆ te d’Ivoire. Review of Business and
Economics, 54(3), 258–272.

Demont, M., Zossou, E., Rutsaert, P., Ndour, M., Van Mele, P., &
Verbeke, W. (2012). Consumer valuation of improved rice parboiling
technologies in Benin. Food Quality and Preference, 23(1), 63–70.

Diagana, B., Akindes, F., Savadogo, K., Reardon, T., & Staatz, J. (1999).
Eﬀects of the CFA franc devaluation on urban food consumption in
West Africa: Overview and cross-country comparisons. Food Policy,
24(5), 465–478.

Diagana, B., & Reardon, T. (1999). Household consumption responses to
the franc CFA devaluation: Evidence from urban Senegal. Food Policy,
24(5), 495–515.

Diagne, M., Demont, M., Seck, P. A., & Diaw, M. A. (2013). Self-
suﬃciency policy and irrigated rice productivity in the Senegal River
Valley. Food Security, in press.

Dichter, E. (1962). The world customer. Harvard Business Review, 40(4),

113–122.

Dieng, M. (2012). Thiebou dieune: Senegal’s rice and ﬁsh dish. Rice

Today, 11(3), 20.

Ehmke, M. D., Lusk, J. L., & Tyner, W. (2008). Measuring the relative
importance of preferences for country-of-origin in China, France,
Niger and the United States. Agricultural Economics, 38(3), 277–285.
Erhabor, P. O. I., & Ojogho, O. (2011). Eﬀect of quality on the demand

Bezemer, D., & Headey, D. (2008). Agriculture, development, and urban

for rice in Nigeria. Agricultural Journal, 6(5), 207–212.

bias. World Development, 36(8), 1342–1364.

Bilkey, W., & Nes, E.

on
product evaluation. Journal of International Business Studies, 13(1),
89–99.

(1982). Country-of-origin

eﬀects

Binswanger, H. P., & Deininger, K. (1997). Explaining agricultural and
agrarian policies in developing countries. Journal of Economic Liter-
ature, 35(4), 1958–2005.

Boughton, D., & Reardon, T. (1997). Will promotion of coarse grain
processing turn the tide for traditional cereals in the Sahel? Recent
empirical evidence from Mali. Food Policy, 22(4), 307–316.

Bru¨ntrup, M., Nguyen, T., & Kaps, C. (2006). Food-importing countries
in liberalized world trade. The rice market in Senegal. Agriculture &
Rural Development, 1, 22–25.

Chianu, J. N., & Tsujii, H. (2005). Determinants of farmers’ decision to
adopt or not adopt inorganic fertilizer in the savannas of northern
Nigeria. Nutrient Cycling in Agroecosystems, 70(3), 293–301.

Corrigan, J. R., & Rousu, M. C. (2008). Testing whether ﬁeld auction
experiments are demand revealing in practice. Journal of Agricultural
and Resource Economics, 33(2), 290–301.

Cragg, J. G. (1971). Some statistical models for limited dependent
variables with application to demand for durable goods. Econometrica,
39(5), 829–844.

Fall, A. A., & Diagne, A. (2008). Etude de la relation qualite´-prix du riz
produit dans la vallee du ﬂeuve Senegal. Rapport Project FNRAA.
Dakar, Senegal: Fonds National de Recherches Agricoles et Agro-
alimentaires (FNRAA).

Fall, A. A., Fall, C. A. K., Gningue, D. R., Ndir, B., & Ndour, M. (2007).
Etude sur les crite`res de qualite´ et les modes de consommation du riz
au Se´ne´gal. Rapport Projet FNRAA 010/AP03M010202. Dakar,
Se´ne´gal: Fonds National de Recherches Agricoles et Agro-alimentaires
(FNRAA).

Friedman, J. (1990). Being in the world: Globalization and localization.

Theory, Culture & Society, 7(2), 311–328.

Gning, R. D., Doumouya, N. T. T. S., Diouf, F. F., & Aw, A. T. (2007).
Livret de recettes a` base de riz. Dakar, Se´ne´gal: Institut de Technologie
Alimentaire (ITA).

Haines, P. S., Guilkey, D. K., & Popkin, B. M. (1988). Modeling food
consumption decisions as a two-step process. American Journal of
Agricultural Economics, 70(3), 543–552.

Han, C. M. (1989). Country image: Halo or summary construct?. Journal

of Marketing Research, 26, 222–229.

Harrison, G. W., Harstad, R. M., & Rutstro¨m, E. E. (2004). Experimental
methods and elicitation of values. Experimental Economics, 7(2),
123–140.

CSA (2012). Syste` me d’Information sur les Marche´s (SIM). Retrieved

Harrison, G. W., & List, J. A. (2004). Field experiments. Journal of

from http://www.csa.sn.

Economic Literature, 42, 1009–1055.

74

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

Harrison, G. W., & Rutstro¨m, E. E. (2008). Experimental evidence on the
existence of hypothetical bias in value elicitation methods. In C. R.
Plott, & V. L. Smith (Eds.). Handbook of experimental economics
results (Vol. 1, Part 5, pp. 752–767). New York, USA: Elsevier.

Heinemann, R. J. B., Behrens, J. H., & Lanfer-Marquez, U. M. (2006). A
study on the acceptability and consumer attitude towards parboiled
rice. International Journal of Food Science and Technology, 41, 627–634.
Hobbs, J. E., Cooney, A., & Fulton, M. (2000). Value chains in the agri-
food sector. Saskatoon, Canada: College of Agriculture, University of
Saskatchewan.

Josling, T. (2006). The war on terroir: Geographical indications as a
transatlantic trade conﬂict. Journal of Agricultural Economics, 57(3),
337–363.

Ju¨ tting, J. (2000). Transmission of price shifts in the context of structural
adjustment: An empirical analysis for staple food after the devaluation
of the franc CFA in Ivory Coast. Agricultural Economics, 22(1), 67–74.
Kelly, V., Reardon, T., Diagana, B., & Fall, A. A. (1995). Impacts of
devaluation on Senegalese households: Policy implications. Food
Policy, 20(4), 299–313.

Kennedy, E., & Reardon, T. (1994). Shift to non-traditional grains in the
diets of East and West Africa: Role of women’s opportunity cost of
time. Food Policy, 19(1), 45–56.

Lipton, M. (1977). Why poor people stay poor: Urban bias in world

development. London, UK: Temple Smith.

Loureiro, M. L., Umberger, W. J., & Hine, S. (2003). Testing the initial
endowment eﬀect in experimental auctions. Applied Economics Letters,
10(5), 271–275.

Lusk, J. L., Feldkamp, T., & Schroeder, T. C. (2004). Experimental
auction procedure: Impact on valuation of quality diﬀerentiated goods.
American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 86(2), 389–405.

Lusk, J. L., & Shogren, J. F. (2007). Experimental auctions: Methods and
applications in economic and marketing research. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.

Melton, B. E., Huﬀman, W. E., Shogren, J. F., & Fox, J. A. (1996).
Consumer preferences for fresh food items with multiple quality
attributes: Evidence from an experimental auction of pork chops.
American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 78(4), 916–923.

Ministe`re de l’Agriculture et de l’Elevage (2008). Programme national
d’autosuﬃsance en riz a` l’horizon 2015: Document introductif au Conseil
Interministeriel du 4 janvier 2008. Dakar: Ministe`re de l’Agriculture et
de L’Elevage, Re´publique du Se´ne´gal.

Moschini, G., Menapace, L., & Pick, D. (2008). Geographical indications
and the competitive provision of quality in agricultural markets.
American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 90(3), 794–812.

Moseley, W. G., Carney, J., & Becker, L. (2010). Neoliberal policy, rural
livelihoods, and urban food security in West Africa: A comparative
study of The Gambia, Coˆ te d’Ivoire, and Mali. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 107(13),
5774–5779.

Norman, G., Pepall, L., & Richards, D.

(2008). Generic product
advertising, spillovers, and market concentration. American Journal
of Agricultural Economics, 90(3), 719–732.

Obermiller, C., & Spangenberg, E. (1989). Exploring the eﬀects of country
of origin labels: An information processing framework. Advances in
Consumer Research, 16(1), 454–459.

Opoku, R. A., & Akorli, P. A. K. (2009). The preference gap: Ghanaian
consumers’ attitudes toward local and imported products. African
Journal of Business Management, 3(8), 350–357.

Pearson, S. R., Stryker, J. D., Humpreys, C. R., Rader, P. L., Monke, E.
A., Spencer, D. S. C., Craven, K., Tuluy, A. H., McIntire, J., & Page,
J. M. (Eds.) (1981). Rice in West Africa: Policy and economics.
Stanford, CA, USA: Stanford University Press.

Peterson, R. A., & Jolibert, A. J. P. (1995). A meta-analysis of country-of-
origin eﬀects. Journal of International Business Studies, 26(3), 883–900.

Reardon, T. (1993). Cereals demand in the Sahel and potential impacts of

regional cereals protection. World Development, 21(1), 17–35.

Reardon, T., Kelly, V., Crawford, E., Diagana, B., Dione, J., Savadogo,
K., et al. (1997). Promoting sustainable intensiﬁcation and productiv-
ity growth in Sahel agriculture after macroeconomic policy reform.
Food Policy, 22(4), 317–327.

Roosen, J., Fox, J. A., Hennessy, D. A., & Schreiber, A. (1998).
Consumers’ valuation of insecticide use restrictions: An application to
apples. Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics, 23(2),
367–384.

Ross, C. G. (1983). Review: Rice in West Africa: Policy and Economics.

The Journal of Modern African Studies, 21(2), 335–336.

Saverimuttu, V., & Rempel, H. (2004). The determinants of cereal grain
imports: Sub-Saharan Africa, 1970–1997. African Development Review,
16(3), 525–548.

Schooler, R. D. (1965). Product bias in the Central American Common

Market. Journal of Marketing Research, 4, 394–397.

Seck, P. A., Tollens, E., Wopereis, M. C. S., Diagne, A., & Bamba, I.
(2010). Rising trends and variability of rice prices: Threats and
opportunities for sub-Saharan Africa. Food Policy, 35(5), 403–411.

Shogren, J. F., Margolis, M., Koo, C., & List, J. (2001). A random nth-
price auction. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 46(4),
409–421.

Shogren, J. F., Shin, S. Y., Hayes, D. J., & Kliebenstein, J. B. (1994).
Resolving diﬀerences in willingness to pay and willingness to accept.
American Economic Review, 84(1), 255–270.

Singare, K., Reardon, T., Camara, Y., Wanzala, M., Teme, B., & Sanogo,
O. (1999). Household consumption responses to the franc CFA
devaluation: Evidence from urban Mali. Food Policy, 24(5), 517–534.
Tomlins, K. I., Manful, J. T., Gayin, J., Kudjawu, B., & Tamakloe, I.
(2007). Study of sensory evaluation, consumer acceptability, aﬀord-
ability and market price of rice. Journal of the Science of Food and
Agriculture, 87(8), 1564–1575.

Tomlins, K. I., Manful, J. T., Larwer, P., & Hammond, L. (2005). Urban
consumer preferences and sensory evaluation of locally produced and
imported rice in West Africa. Food Quality and Preference, 16(1),
79–89.

Unnevehr, L. J. (1986). Consumer demand for rice grain quality and
in Southeast Asia.

returns to research for quality improvement
American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 68(3), 634–641.

USAID (2010). Campagne de marketing social: Sondage sur la perception
et les habitudes de consommation des ce´re´ales locales. Dakar, Senegal:
United States Agency for International Development
(USAID),
Project Croissance Economique (PCE).

USDA (2011). Nigeria: Grain and feed annual. GAIN Report NI11015:

USDA Foreign Agricultural Service.

USDA (2012). 2012 West Africa: Rice annual. GAIN Report: USDA

Foreign Agricultural Service.

Verbeke, W., & Roosen, J. (2009). Market diﬀerentiation potential of
country-of-origin, quality and traceability labeling. The Estey Centre
Journal of International Law and Trade Policy, 10(1), 20–35.

Verlegh, P. W. J., & Steenkamp, J.-B. E. M. (1999). A review and meta-
analysis of country-of-origin research. Journal of Economic Psychol-
ogy, 20, 521–546.

Vickrey, W. (1961). Counterspeculation, auctions, and competitive sealed

tenders. Journal of Finance, 16(1), 8–37.

World Bank (2008). World development report 2008. Washington, DC: The

World Bank.

Zhao, X., Anderson, K., & Wittwer, G.

(2003). Who gains from
Australian generic wine promotion and R&D?. Australian Journal of
Agricultural and Resource Economics, 47(2), 181–209.

