The Impact of Islam on Women in Senegal 
Author(s): Lucy E. Creevey 
Source: The Journal of Developing Areas, Apr., 1991, Vol. 25, No. 3 (Apr., 1991), pp. 
347-368
Published by: College of Business, Tennessee State University 

 

Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/4191991

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide 
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and 
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. 
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at 
https://about.jstor.org/terms

College of Business, Tennessee State University is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, 
preserve and extend access to The Journal of Developing Areas

This content downloaded from 

            128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 21:38:24 UTC             

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The Journal of Developing Areas 25 (April 1991) 347-368

 The Impact of Islam on
 Women in Senegal

 LUCY E. CREEVEY

 This paper explores the impact of Islam on the status of women in
 Senegal.' The underlying concern of this discussion is whether or not
 religious beliefs determine the role and status of women in predomi-
 nantly Muslim societies. The nation chosen for this analysis, Senegal, is
 a country with 85 to 90 percent of its population adhering to Islam,
 although it is not officially an Islamic state since it is not governed by
 Islamic law. There are, in fact, no Islamic states in West Africa other
 than Mauritania, which by the ethnicity and culture of its population
 may be more truly grouped with North African states. But, Senegal has
 had a long exposure to Islam, which has been an important element in
 politics in the colonial and postcolonial period despite Senegal's secular
 government. Islam is the ideology that has cemented the political obe-
 dience and loyalty of the majority of the rural population to their Muslim
 leaders.2 Thus Senegal is a significant country in which to study the
 influence of Islam on women.

 The impact of Islam on women has been the subject of much com-
 ment, especially since the political takeover in Iran by Ayatollah Khomeini
 in 1979. The Khomeini regime reversed a liberalizing trend in Iran under
 which women had gradually won the right to access to education, the
 vote, abolition of the veil, free abortion, a ban on polygamy, and main-
 tenance after divorce. Under Khomeini, women were forced back into
 the veil and lost marital and civil rights. After Khomeini's death, the
 tight control over women has gradually loosened but women have not
 yet regained the status they had under the shah.3 The situation in Iran
 stimulated a wave of indignation in the West in the 1980s over the treat-
 ment of women and paralleled a growing interest in the position of women
 in developing countries generally. Numerous books and articles by authors
 from many different cultural backgrounds have been written on Third
 World women, many of which focus on the restrictive nature of the

 Director, Women's Studies Program, and Professor, Department of Political Science, Uni-
 versity of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06268.

 ? 1991 by Western Illinois University.

This content downloaded from 

            128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 21:38:24 UTC             

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 348 Lucy E. Creevey

 teachings of the Qu'ran in regard to women. These teachings are frequently
 seen as a direct cause of the inferior status (relative to men) of Muslim
 women.4 But not everyone agrees that Islam can be identified as a, or
 the, principal factor in the determination of the secondary status that
 women occupy in most Muslim countries. Some argue that Islam is no
 more to be blamed than many other factors such as traditional pre-Islamic
 norms and influences from the West.5

 This brief study explores the ways in which Islam interacts with pre-
 Islamic customs, influences from the West in the colonial and post-
 colonial era, and the demands of a growing economy, in order to arrive
 at a tentative conclusion on what the impact of Islam has been on women
 in Senegal. Later more extensive studies may test this conclusion more
 rigorously, but this initial work is seen as useful for drawing together
 the research and scattered data presently available in Senegal, France,
 and the United States. To this end, the current status of women in Sen-
 egal will first be briefly presented and then the major factors affecting
 that status discussed.

 The Current Status of Senegalese Women

 The position of women in Senegal on a superficial level seems to be
 one of relative equality with men, at least compared to women in many
 Middle Eastern countries. Women are not generally veiled and they are
 not secluded in harems or family compounds. Women walk freely on the
 streets, day and night, wearing bright clothes. Women sell many of the
 goods in the open markets and vend them on the streets. Middle-class
 women sometimes wear Western clothes and often appear with compli-
 cated and beautiful coiffures plainly evident. In university groups and in
 business sessions where women are present, they speak their opinions
 openly. But the actual status of Senegalese women cannot be understood
 by these visual impressions. This section attempts to get a closer picture
 of where women stand in society by examining their relative access to
 education, their economic standing, and their political power.6

 Women have made substantial progress in their access to education
 since independence in 1960-even in 1965 only 1 percent were literate,
 whereas currently that figure has risen to 20 percent.7 Progress is slow,
 however, and women are far from catching up with men in terms of their
 educational achievements.

 Educational institutions are not evenly distributed in Senegal. Primary
 school is almost universally available in the Dakar region but not in the
 most remote rural areas. Of the 24 secondary schools (both technical and
 general lycees), 9 are found in Dakar and 5 others are in St.-Louis (the
 old colonial capital). The rest are scattered in the larger towns in the
 other 8 regions (Ziguinchor, Diourbel, Tambacounda, Kaolack, Thies,
 Louga, Fatick, and Kolda). The University is located in Dakar.8 In the
 7-to-12 age group 90 percent of the children in Dakar are in school while
 only 41 percent of children in this group are in school in the other regions,
 excepting Ziguinchor.9 Not surprisingly, the percentage of girls in school
 appears to be highest in Dakar. Government reports do not show the
 gender ratio as they did in earlier years-in 1974, for example, the annual
 economic report showed that 58 percent of girls aged 6 to 14 in Dakar
 were in school, while only 10 percent were in school in the rural and

This content downloaded from 

            128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 21:38:24 UTC             

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Impact of Islam on Women in Senegal 349

 overwhelmingly Muslim region of Diourbel.'0 Such comparisons are not
 published in the most recent economic reports. Information currently
 available, however, suggests that the percentage of girls in school has
 improved in the rural areas although it remains substantially lower than
 in Dakar (and Ziguinchor). Statistics showing the overall access of girls
 compared to boys to education in Senegal are presented in table 1. These
 figures prove that although universal primary education has been pro-
 vided for in government plans since independence in 1960, and although
 the plans for education do not discriminate by gender, women receive
 substantially less schooling than men, especially in rural areas.

 Women have entered the wage labor force in the last 20 years and
 are to be found employed not only in agriculture but also in factories,
 working as secretaries, and scattered through higher administrative posi-
 tions in many agencies. Of Senegalese women between ages 15 and 64,
 54 percent were reported to be in the labor force and 38 percent of the
 total labor force was female in 1985.11 But female wage earners, primarily
 located in towns and the urbanized regions, are still a tiny minority.
 Employment figures also show that women lag behind men in the level
 of wage-earning positions occupied. In general they do not occupy the
 higher status or best remunerated posts in any profession in Senegal.
 Table 2 indicates the relative position of women in commerce and indus-
 try. Looking at table 3, which shows the employment of women in the
 urban region of Dakar (the Cap Vert), the paucity of higher-status wage-
 earning positions for Senegalese women is further demonstrated.

 Approximatelz 81 percent of the population is still primarily involved
 in agriculture'1 The economic well-being of most of the population in
 Senegal depends on their work in the main family plot and the individ-
 ually controlled private plots where both cash and food crops are grown.
 Official surveys, influenced by Western economic practices, however,
 frequently underestimate the number of women involved in agricul-
 ture-they are reported as "housewives" and their husbands are seen as
 the providers.13 The irony of this is clear in Senegal, where women are
 essential to agricultural production and where it is inaccurate to portray
 the economic status of the family by looking at what the male family
 head earns (either in wages or from crops he sells).

 TABLE 1

 SCHOOL ATTENDANCE 1986-1987

 Elementary school

 (ages 7-12) 610,946 360,458 59 250,488 41

 Total Boys % Girls %

 Middle school

 (ages 13-16) 102,771 91,466 89 11,305 11

 Secondary school

 (ages 17-19)

 General 30,005 21,003 70 9,002 30
 Technical 4,093 3,479 85 614 15
 SOURCE: Republique du Senegal, Situation Economique du Senegal, Edition: 1987 (Dakar:
 Direction de la Statistique, 1988), Pp. 40-41. Hereafter Situation Economique 1987.
 NOTE: It should be taken into account that only 8 percent of the boys and girls aged 17
 to 19, who are the secondary-school-age children, attend school.

This content downloaded from 

            128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 21:38:24 UTC             

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 350 Lucy E. Creevey

 TABLE 2

 PAID EMPLOYMENT-1987

 Men % Women S

 Permanent

 Upper-level cadres 1,180 95 61 5
 Engineers and upper-

 level technicians 2,859 92 237 8
 Technical assistants 12,100 92 1,051 8
 Workers 37,430 93 2,881 7

 Total 53,569 93 4,230 7

 Seasonal 20,661 92 1,747 8

 SOURCES: Statistics come from a survey by the Centre Unique de Collecte d'Information
 (CUCI). Industries included nine sectors: food; textiles and shoes; building; commerce;
 transport and telecommunication; hotels/restaurants; and energy, tobacco, and other diverse
 service industries. See Situation Economique 1987, pp. 20-34.

 Of course, not all Senegalese women are engaged in crop production.
 There have always been variations among the major ethnic groups as to
 who, in a family did what in agriculture, ranging from the originally
 nomadic groups (such as the Peulh), where women traditionally had little
 responsibility in cultivation, to the dominant Wolof ethnic group and the
 second-ranking Serer (41 and 15 percent, respectively, of the total pop-
 ulation),'4 where women played a central role. Women in the latter two
 groups planted the seed, fertilized, and weeded the crops and harvested
 in both the main family fields and their own plots. They were paid in
 cash or kind for their work in the family field. Women disposed of the
 excess produce or income they earned themselves. Their freedom to do
 so rested on a family economic system by which households in the major
 ethnic groups of Senegal traditionally maintained multiple budgets with
 each adult family member keeping track of his or her own. Each would
 have obligations to his/her family imposed by custom on the money he/
 she earned (or the in-kind produce of their labor). Today this tradition
 is generally continued in rural areas. Currently, women provide essential
 labor in the family fields and raise a substantial proportion of food crops
 in their private plots. They grow peanuts, the major cash crop, in their
 private plots as well.'5

 WOMEN IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR IN CAP VERT

 TABLE 3

 Qualification Senegalese Foreigners Total
 Employers 38 345 383
 Upper management 8 73 81
 Upper-level technicians 10 126 136
 Technicians, agricultural technicians 70 324 394
 Qualified executives 351 448 799
 Employees and specialized workers 276 121 397
 Unskilled workers, employees 1,046 43 1,089
 Apprentices 9 9 18

 Total 1,808 1,489 3,297
 SOURCES: Taken from Marie-Louise Diouf, "Femmes et migrations," in Women and Rural
 Development in Africa, Association of African Women for Research and Development:
 Occasional Papers, no. 2, ed. Soha Abdel Kader et al. (Dakar: Imprimerie St. Paul, 1986),
 p. 139.

This content downloaded from 

            128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 21:38:24 UTC             

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Impact of Islam on Women in Senegal 351

 Because most rural Senegalese women can dispose of income they
 receive, they may be seen as relatively more independent than women
 in many Western households where only one family budget exists con-
 trolled by the male family head. But this relative independence is mis-
 leading because Senegalese women are still viewed as subordinate to the
 men in their family. As one close observer of Senegalese society writes:
 First of all, the relations between husband and wife appear to fall clearly into the model
 of dominance/submission. Privileged by his status as a man in a society that has tradi-
 tionally recognized the agnatic line-and by his economic power (he has charge of the
 family), the husband maintains authority over the wife, who owes him respect and
 obedience. 16

 Although the Senegalese women had (and has) a certain economic
 independence, this does not mean she had economic equality with males
 in society. Traditionally this inequality was reflected in the control by
 the male head of household over the major family resource, land. Rarely
 did a woman inherit land on her own, even when her husband or father
 died. Control over land was passed on from father to son and sometimes
 from father to his next brother (which caused confusion and family con-
 flicts at times). Women received plots of land for their use from their
 fathers, or if married, from their husbands. They could not pass these
 on to their heirs, not even to their sons.17

 The household farming system has changed in Senegal in the postin-
 dependence period. For example, the head of the household (chef de
 menage) has taken on more authority relative to the head of the extended
 family group (chef de carre). These changes, however, do not generally
 indicate the equality of men and women family members. In modern
 Senegal, rural families still live together in compounds. An extended
 family, comprising as many as five households, may live together under
 the direction of a family head (chef de carre), but each household will
 follow the directions of their individual chef de menage in most day-to-
 day economic decisions. The chef de menage allocates the land to his
 family members (see table 4). In general it is the smallest plots of land
 the furthest from the dwellings (and therefore inconvenient) that are allo-
 cated to women for cereal and peanut production. Women will receive
 small pieces of land close to the dwellings (and more importantly the
 well) for vegetable and condiment production but as men do not ordi-
 narily grow vegetables, there is no competition for these tiny plots.'8

 HOUSEHOLD DIVISION OF LAND AND PRODUCTION

 TABLE 4

 PEANUTS MILLET

 % of Average Yield % of Average Yield
 STATUS Plots Size in Ha Kg/ha Plots Size in Ha Kg/ha
 Chef de carre 25 2.4 1,292 73 1.6 1,165
 Chef de menage 8 1.6 1,078 13 0.9 1,196
 Women 29 0.7 985 8 0.8 551
 Unmarried men 24 1.3 1,067 5 0.9 781
 Migrants 13 1.3 1,071 1 0.3 504
 SOURCE: From a survey in Sine Saloum in 1971, reported in John Waterbury, "The Sen-
 egalese Peasant: How Good Is Our Conventional Wisdom?" in The Political Economy of
 Risk and Choice in Senegal, ed. John Waterbury and Mark Gersovits (London: Frank
 Cass, 1987), p. 50.

This content downloaded from 

            128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 21:38:24 UTC             

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 352 Lucy E. Creevey

 In the postindependence period there has been increasing pressure on
 the land owing to population growth, urbanization, and the widespread
 increase of area cultivated (in part the result of the spread of peanuts as
 a cash crop). Land has been the source of major conflicts among ethnic
 groups as well as individuals. Furthermore, as people laid official claim
 to land areas, land distribution was becoming markedly unequal. As a
 result, the government of Senegal passed a series of laws (specifically in
 1964 and 1972) to govern the transformation of land from a status without
 specific titled ownership (but with traditional use of the land by families)
 to one where land may be registered to individuals. These laws have not
 been uniformly successful, particularly in regard to equalizing landhold-
 ings. In addition, where these laws have been applied and land has been
 individually registered, only men have received the land.'9

 The modernization of agriculture has also not generally benefited women
 in terms of their relative economic position. Training and tools came
 from the West, where women have not had a major role in agriculture
 for centuries. As a result, the agricultural needs of women were ignored.
 Training was geared to men and credit and tools were made available
 to them rather than to the women. It was assumed that whatever advan-
 tages were made available to men would also benefit the women mem-
 bers of their households. To some extent there was a trickledown effect
 of this kind; however, women did not get equal benefits. At times they
 gained from the greater demand for their labor (for example, when the
 area under cultivation in the family field increased). Or they may have
 benefited from the new equipment, fertilizer, and seeds, as men would
 provide them to women once the main family fields were taken care of.
 But women got the least and they were the last to receive these advan-
 tages. As a result, their productivity often lagged behind that of men (as
 table 4 shows). Sometimes mechanization led to their loss of income
 although they may have gained in leisure time. Generally, they did not
 get training themselves and as they had no land for collateral, they did
 not receive credit. Thus, they could not purchase new equipment for
 their own use. Although in recent years the government of Senegal has
 tried to include women in its rural programs, women still have a very
 secondary position in agricultural planning and implementation.20

 Access to major economic resources generally may be gained through
 the manipulation of political power. In Senegal, however, women still
 have very little access to such power. Senegal is a democratic republic
 with a multiparty system. All citizens over the age of 21 have the right
 to vote, including women. Women also have the right to hold public
 office at the national, regional, and local levels. But women rarely are
 elected or appointed to political positions at any level. In 1985 women
 formed only 11 percent of the national legislature although they were 51
 percent of the population.2' Women have begun to be appointed to min-
 isterial posts: the first two in 1978. In 1985, two women were ministers
 in or, differently expressed, women were 13 percent of the Executive
 Cabinet. After the most recent elections in April 1988, three women
 were named to ministerial positions. No woman, however, has been cho-
 sen for the most powerful and influential cabinet positions such as Min-
 ister of Labor, Minister of Agriculture, or Minister of Foreign Affairs.

This content downloaded from 

            128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 21:38:24 UTC             

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Impact of Islam on Women in Senegal 353

 Women are chosen to head less-sensitive ministries seen as more appro-
 priate to women such as Women's Affairs, or Health and Social Welfare.22

 Since 1972, the government of Senegal has been replacing Regional

 Assemblies with rural community units, of which there were 319 in 1983.23
 Even in these subregional political units, women have very little power.
 Few women serve on the rural councils that govern the communities.
 In a study in the Thies region (which was the first region to undergo
 this reform), in the 5 communities studied, there were 4 women coun-
 cillors out of a total of 500.24

 Cooperatives are another political arena in which leaders wield control
 over major resources. They are especially significant in rural areas because
 they provide access to credit and also channel selected seeds, fertilizer,
 and pesticides to farmers. By law, women may join the cooperatives but,
 in practice, they seldom do. Usually the heads of household (both chefs
 de carre and chefs de menage) are the ones who become members of
 the cooperative. Even in the Casamance (the Ziguinchor Region), where
 women have had more education than on average, women are only 5
 percent of the cooperative membership.25 In the 1980s, the government
 of Senegal made an effort to revitalize and democratize the cooperative
 structure (passing Cooperative Statutes in 1983), but the long-term impact
 of these reforms is unclear. In the interim, women are more likely to
 be members of the relatively few special women's cooperatives estab-
 lished by the government. These, however, do not come under the juris-
 diction of the Cooperative Service but rather under other agencies such
 as Animation Feminine, which deals with women's issues and does not
 control credit or the provision of agricultural inputs.'

 At the village level, politics are dominated by the interactions between
 the chef de carre and the chefs de menage. Women are politically active
 at this level but usually in their own groups formed to facilitate their
 daily work and assist in times of emergency. These groups are little dis-
 cussed in the general anthropological literature on Senegal,27 but recent
 research suggests that they are a major political outlet for women at the
 local level. Although performing an important political role for women,
 such groups do not provide access to the institutions or organizations that
 control the major economic resources in society, since these are domi-
 nated by men.

 Perhaps the most important point about the political role of women

 in Senegal is that they are gradually expanding their influence. Although
 few women are yet elected to positions (or chosen for political office) at
 the state or community level, issues relating to women's needs in Sen-
 egal are beginning to be more widely heard. There are articulate and
 powerful feminists in Senegal who have made their views on the relative
 deprivation of women clearly known. One representative of Senegalese
 feminists is Marie Angelique Savane, one of the leaders of the Associ-
 ation of African Women for Research and Development (AAWORD) and
 a member of Yewwu Yewwi (a Senegalese feminist organization). Aside
 from numerous articles and contributions to books on the role of women
 in Senegal and African countries generally, she has entered public debates
 that have been carried on in the major newspapers in Senegal. For
 example, in May 1986 she entered into a debate published over the period

This content downloaded from 

            128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 21:38:24 UTC             

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 354 Lucy E. Creevey

 of a week in Le Soleil. In these articles she made the case that Sene-
 galese women were in a second-class position in society and that fem-
 inists did not seek to destroy family or society but to make the status
 of women more compatible with the modern age.29 Savane is not the
 only articulate feminist whose views have been aired publicly.30 Often
 these women have met with considerable opposition by the established
 leaders of society but, nonetheless, their opinions influence Senegalese
 women and sometimes men as well.3'

 The overall direct political influence of women is very slight. They do
 not vote as a unit,32 and the few elected or appointed women in national
 office do not act as centers of a political movement supporting equality
 for women. But, owing to international interest in improving the role
 of women (personified by the United Nations Decade for Women
 1975-1985) and the strong voice of many concerned women in Senegal,
 the government has become more sensitive to women. This has not yet
 been translated into any major attempts to overcome the general public
 assumption of women as second to men with second-class rights and
 second-class privileges in society, but it is at least a bulwark against
 encroaching fundamentalism and a hope for possible change in the future.

 The Influence of the West

 The longest contact that Senegal has had with the West was through
 the colonial experience with France, although European traders from
 Portugal and Spain had landed in Senegal and even set up trading posts
 before the French arrived. The French, who came to the Senegalese
 coast in the sixteenth century to trade, began then a relationship with
 Senegal that was to continue to the present, although the items traded
 and the terms of trade would change drastically over time. At first the
 French made no attempt to conquer the Senegalese peoples. They estab-
 lished trading posts-for example, on the island of Goree off Dakar and
 in St.-Louis on the mouth of the Senegal River. The French wanted
 gold, palm oil, ivory, and other goods, but especially slaves for sale to
 the growing American market. In return the French and other European
 traders provided cheap liquor, guns, salt, cloth, cowrie shells, copper,
 iron bars, dried fish, and brass.33

 Contact between the French and the Senegalese people was minimal
 but, nontheless, the impact of the trade was considerable. Although trade
 routes had long existed across the Sahara to the north, now the new
 lines of contact drew the Senegalese to the coast. Whereas traders for-
 merly had been men from similar backgrounds, now the European trad-
 ers came from a society undergoing waves of industrialization, especially
 by the end of the eighteenth and beginning of the nineteenth centuries.
 They represented new technologies far advanced over what was available
 to people in Senegal. They had tools and weapons better than those of
 the local peoples and a concomitant self-image of superiority. The demands
 stimulated by the trade they began, especially the slave trade, altered
 the local economy and exacerbated interethnic group conflicts. Their value
 systems raised doubts about traditional ways of doing things. Undoubt-
 edly changes occurred in the social and political structures of the ethnic
 groups just as changes occurred regularly in response to influences of

This content downloaded from 

            128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 21:38:24 UTC             

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Impact of Islam on Women in Senegal 355

 other natural and manmade disasters or, more rarely, abundances. Some
 of these changes will certainly have affected the position of women at
 least tangentially-certainly the women taken into slavery or whose fam-
 ilies were decimated by slavery were directly affected. On the whole,
 however, the position of women may not have been seriously altered,
 for only those peoples living near the trading posts had any contact with
 the French, whose roles were restricted to trading and buying (or steal-
 ing) local supplies when needed.34

 The impact of the French on Senegalese society became greater when
 the French began to take control of the area preparatory to annexing it
 as a colony. Tiny colonies of settlers had begun to be established near
 the trading posts even in the eighteenth century. They intermarried with
 Senegalese women and also began to hire Senegalese men and train them
 for various tasks-clerical and military as well as menial. By the mid-
 nineteenth century, there were in these trading towns defined popula-
 tions heavily influenced by the French that included educated or trained
 Africans, mulattos, and French colonists.35

 Slavery was outlawed in France in 1815, but French traders continued
 to be interested in Senegal. They began to try to encourage local pop-
 ulations to grow commercial crops such as cotton, rice, and peanuts,
 especially the latter in Senegal. By the end of the nineteenth century
 competition among European nations and the greed of European traders
 led to a scramble for African territory. The invasion of the French
 destroyed the existing political structure. Senegal had been divided into
 a series of kingdoms reflecting the ethnic composition of their inhabitants
 (Wolof, Tukulor, Dyola, etc.). The economy of these polities had been
 based on trade with the north, and the society had been relatively com-
 plex with freed farmers, nobles, and those of low caste living together
 interdependently in known social and political roles. These roles had been
 altered by the trade established in the sixteenth century, but they were
 ruptured when the French took over the area. By the end of the eigh-
 teen hundreds, this process of French power consolidation was largely
 complete. Now authority reposed in the hands of Europeans. These were
 few in number and largely located in the towns on the coast. In 1904
 the structure of the French African holdings was finalized in the form
 of the French West African and French Equatorial Federations. The cap-
 ital of the former was St.-Louis and then Dakar, Senegal.

 Throughout the colonial period, very few French actually settled in
 Senegal. But their impact was felt in the most remote rural areas. Mone-
 tarization of the economy, following the economic stimuli and the tax-
 gathering system instituted by the colonists, penetrated everywhere. The
 establishment of towns, especially Dakar, where government was cen-
 tered and where industry began to be established and commercial net-
 works built, drew in young men now anxious to find ways of making
 money. Those who lived in the towns were exposed to a new value
 structure that rated those things French far superior to traditional ways
 of doing things. New goods-cloth, metal dishes, new condiments, even-
 tually bicycles, and the like-began to be desired in the interior and
 increased the need to earn cash-either by finding wage jobs or growing
 cash crops. The French varied between trying to distance themselves

This content downloaded from 

            128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 21:38:24 UTC             

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 356 Lucy E. Creevey

 from the Africans and trying to assimilate them. Unlike the British, the
 French permitted Senegalese living in the four largest towns (St.-Louis,
 Goree, Dakar, and Rufisque) to become citizens and elect their own
 municipal officials and also representatives to the National Assembly in
 France.36 Other than this, however, the French reserved political power
 to themselves.

 National political parties did not develop in Senegal until after the
 Second World War. These were also based in the urban areas and sought
 to reach out and win over rural Muslim leaders and their loyal followers
 to make a broad political base. The most successful political figure in
 this period was Leopold Sedar Senghor, whose party quickly came to
 dominate Senegalese politics and who became the first president of Sen-
 egal at its independence in 1960. He remained president until 1981,
 when he was succeeded by his carefully groomed successor, Abdou Diouf.
 Universal voting privileges were granted to the mass of the Senegalese
 only in 1957, following the Loi Cadre, which announced the assumption
 of local self-rule by the French colonies.37

 What impact, then, did the French have on the position of women in
 the colonial period? The first point that seems clear in this regard is that
 the French transmitted the attitudes toward women that were prevalent
 in their own society. Thus it was not a particular brand of discrimination
 against women in Senegal when they did not receive the right of becom-
 ing a French citizen and being able to vote in 1848-this was reserved
 for men as the vote was also reserved for men in France. In France,
 men controlled business and politics; the French colonial invaders assumed
 that men did so in Senegal. They did not try to understand the inter-
 relationships between sexes in Senegal or the established social and eco-
 nomic interdependencies. Since they believed their society was superior
 to whatever existed in Senegal, their policies reflected their own values
 and prejudices. Because they monopolized all political power and because,
 over time, they had grafted their status hierarchy onto the colonial soci-
 ety, their views were extremely influential throughout the country.

 The various ethnic societies in Senegal did not abandon their customs
 and traditions. These were based on centuries of experience through which
 developed their close interdependency with the land and their methods
 of economic survival under difficult climatic conditions. But the French
 values distorted society-French military and commercial men were at
 the pinnacle of power. French policies elevated Senegalese men who
 were chosen to work for the French and who were trained and educated
 in Western systems. Even French citizenship, which meant total iden-
 tification with the colonial mother country, although open to only a few
 men, still was a privileged status that people recognized. There can be
 little doubt that the French view of women influenced the position of
 Senegalese women.

 A further point is that the sector of France represented in Senegal
 was itself badly skewed. The colonial officials and their assistants were
 representatives of the military hierarchy in France in which women played
 no role at all. French history is sprinkled with influential women who
 had a major role in society and occupied privileged positions of power,

This content downloaded from 

            128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 21:38:24 UTC             

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Impact of Islam on Women in Senegal 357

 but this aspect of French society was not represented in Senegal. It was
 the male military ethic that personified colonialism.

 In the twentieth century, of course, women began to gain rights in
 France. Thus women received the vote after the First World War and
 as France modernized in the interwar period and after the Second World
 War, women began to be accorded more equal status in the labor force
 and generally in society. Thus, by the end of the colonial period, French
 officials were transmitting a slightly different message in which the equality
 of women with men was theoretically, if not practically, acknowledged.
 French policymakers, however, still had -a very clear role distinction in
 mind for the sexes. Men were the heads of households, the family pro-
 viders; women were wives and mothers whose job was to support the
 family head and care for his children. The proof of this is reflected in
 the provision of credit, tools, training, and the like only to the men (see
 earlier discussion). After 1960, officials in charge of the economic mod-
 ernization program were largely Senegalese, but these men had been
 trained by the French system and were advised by the French. When
 it came to introducing Western technology, the views of the Western
 advisers were extremely influential-women were excluded from their
 planning. Or, to be more accurate, there were programs for women but
 these were primarily programs to improve their lives in the traditional
 roles that French officials had recognized for them-in health, sanitation,
 child care, and crafts, including sewing.

 A number of factors led to a revision in attitude by French and other
 Western advisers in the last ten years; among these was the rise of con-
 sciousness among women of their inequality not only in the West but
 throughout the world. Perhaps equally important for stimulating govern-
 ment concern for women was the fact that agricultural programs in
 developing countries, and especially in the poorest developing countries,
 had not been generally successful. Many factors are involved, including
 the convolutions of the world market, but one extremely relevant point
 was that clearly the small individual producer had not been effectively
 reached. Yet the small farmers produced the largest proportion of food
 crops as well as a significant proportion of cash crops in these countries.
 In Senegal, devastated by droughts in the 1970s and 1980s, the issue
 was crucial. The fact that women produce a major part of the food and
 cash crops in the country became more explicitly recognized as, for the
 first time, policymakers sought to reach them with their agricultural
 planning programs. Western advisers, particularly those from donor
 agencies, pressed for programs that would effectively involve women both
 to improve their living conditions and to increase their productivity. Sen-
 egalese policymakers on their own initiative sought to find ways to include
 women in rural mobilization, credit, and other development schemes.
 As pointed out previously, however, women still do not have equal access
 to any of the factors of production in Senegal. As for the impact of the
 West on the position of women in Senegal, it has gone almost full circle
 from diminishing and undermining the role of women in the economy
 (and thus in the society) to attempting to force their inclusion in eco-
 nomic planning. But the circle is not quite complete, since Western

This content downloaded from 

            128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 21:38:24 UTC             

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 358 Lucy E. Creevey

 advisers often accept a token compliance with the inclusion of women in
 their projects.38

 The Impact of Islam

 Islam entered Senegal in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries,
 spreading simultaneously with the more insidious outflow of French
 influence from the coast to the interior. The missionaries of Islam were
 from brotherhoods or tariqas in North Africa.39 These were sufi orders,
 tightly organized and hierarchized from the shaykh at the top, through
 the khalif (leader of an individual regional branch), to the taalibe or indi-
 vidual members. The sufi orders softened the orthodox teachings of Islam
 and made them more intelligible to the average uneducated lay people
 who received the religion. This leavening was accomplished by greater
 emphasis on magic, mysticism, and the power of the brotherhood's leader
 to intercede on behalf of his followers, who were blindly obedient to his
 commands and teachings.40

 Islam became the dominant religion in Senegal at the time when French
 military expansion was taking place. In the early years of the spread of
 Islam, the leaders of the precolonial kingdoms among the Wolof and the
 Tukulor had resisted conversion. By the end of the century, however,
 virtually all of these ethnic groups (including their noble classes) had
 converted. Islam, in its popular brotherhood form, had taken on a social
 and political role in the process of the transformation of society. In the
 first place, the brotherhoods acted as opponents to colonial domination.
 Muslim leaders led the periodic revolts, often called holy wars, which
 were the major political obstacles faced by the French in the conquest
 and pacification of this area.4' In addition, in their earliest stages, the
 brotherhoods offered a kind of social mobility that formerly had not been
 present in society. The coming of the French had undermined the tra-
 ditional social order and weakened the power of those in control. In the
 period of social ferment that ensued, the advent of the brotherhoods
 gave a chance for former slaves to disobey their masters (by giving their
 obedience and loyalty to a Muslim leader of their choice) and even for
 a low-caste person to rise to the position of being a religious leader himself.
 Whatever their initial role in the social reform of society, the broth-
 erhoods quickly became assimilated into the establishment. Members of
 the former aristocratic families now were the ones who were named to
 be leaders of the tariqas. The preexistent social order, with some mod-
 ifications and some changes in the names and faces of those in power,
 was absorbed into the Senegalese chapters of the Muslim brotherhoods.
 The brotherhood fight with the French was quickly dispelled as well.
 Once French political control was assured (in the period before the First
 World War), the French began to ally themselves with the brotherhood
 leaders, the marabouts. They practiced a form of divide and conquer,
 pitting some leaders against others but basically using the marabouts as
 their intermediaries through whom they reached and controlled the rural
 population of the country.

 This pattern persisted after the colonial period. Senegal was ruled from
 independence until 1981 by a Catholic president, and postcolonial pol-
 itics were dominated by a group of government politicians who carefully

This content downloaded from 

            128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 21:38:24 UTC             

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Impact of Islam on Women in Senegal 359

 courted the Muslim leaders in the countryside to ensure their support
 and their help in organizing the rural population. In return for their
 support, politicians gave major marabouts gifts of money and larger
 advantages, pressing very softly any social reforms of which the religious
 leaders disapproved. Abdou Diouf, who succeeded President Senghor,
 changed somewhat the tenor of politics in Senegal. Known as a "tech-
 nocrat" (as opposed to Senghor, the humanist, poet, and philosopher),
 Diouf began to push for more stringent social and economic reforms. His
 policies had immediate repercussions among the Muslim leaders, who
 had already become used to him as a more placatory emissary of the
 previous government in their courtyards. But, despite public and open
 anger by the major leaders over some reforms he instituted, Diouf has
 not broken off communications with the marabouts, who still expect-
 and receive-delegations from the government asking their assistance in
 getting rural support in return for favors of various kinds.42

 Despite the secular tone of Dioufs reforms, his tenure in office has
 also been associated with a deepening of Islam in Senegal, a move toward
 a more orthodox Islam based more closely on the conventional teachings
 of the Qu'ran. In the colonial and immediate postcolonial period, there
 had not been many Muslim teachers and scholars in the urban areas, as
 was the situation at the time in North Africa. There were thousands of
 marabouts in the rural areas but not many of these had any systematic
 training in Arabic or Qu'ranic studies. There were a few highly educated
 marabouts, such as Sheikh Ibrahima Niasse (d. 1978), whose writings
 were known all over North Africa. In general, however, Qu'ranic schools
 in Senegal taught a smattering of Islam to young male followers who
 could not read or write in Arabic and who learned the Qu'ranic verses
 by rote with little understanding of what they were about.

 Currently in the early 1990s, the situation has changed. Numerous
 Senegalese were sent to the Middle East and North Africa to be edu-
 cated in the 1970s and 1980s and they have since returned home. Aid
 from the Middle East has flowed into Senegal since independence to
 facilitate the construction of many large and small mosques and to help
 in the establishment of a more regularized Qu'ranic school system, avail-
 able now at least in Dakar and some other urban areas. A much more
 self-consciously Muslim university and graduate constituency has grad-
 ually increased pressure on the government to recognize Muslim (as
 opposed to Christian) holidays.

 As in the first years of Islam in Senegal, this new wave of interest has
 political and social implications. Senegal was devastated by repeated
 droughts in the 1970s and 1980s. The Senegalese economy never "took
 off" in the postindependence period. The market for peanuts, originally
 the major cash crop, fell off dramatically after independence and the export
 agricultural sector shrank. Industry has fared better but still has not been
 very successful. In 1988, industrial production overall was less than in
 1982 although phosphates, the major mineral export, had in fact increased
 substantially. The service sector, including tourism, became the largest
 source of national income, but it has been clearly overexpanded with a
 significantly lower percentage of beds occupied in 1987 over 1986 or 1985.
 Senegal's total external debt in 1988 was US$3.019 billion, which was 64

This content downloaded from 

            128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 21:38:24 UTC             

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 360 Lucy E. Creevey

 percent of its GNP (as compared to 1970 when the external debt was
 only 16 percent of the GNP).3

 Weighted down by economic problems and reacting against the long
 ties to the French with their implied criticism of local culture and cus-
 toms, many Senegalese have turned to Islam for an affirmation of their
 national identity apart from the West. Incorporation of the Islamic code
 in dress and manner has become more typical of government leaders,
 and open criticism of the more tolerant laissez-faire atmosphere of the
 previous generations has become common in the press. The marabouts
 had always controlled the manners and morals of their disciples living
 close to their brotherhood centers, but they had turned a blind eye to
 the secular life of their more distant urban disciples (as they had done
 with the French colonial rulers). Now not only politicians are attacked
 for laxity and corruption, but also the marabouts themselves come in for
 very explicit criticism by sharp-tongued fundamentalists. Loyal brother-
 hood followers have reacted indignantly. It seems almost as if the quarrel
 between the two Muslim camps may be seen as a principal factor keep-
 ing Islam from focusing a new wave of anti-Western Islamic feeling
 throughout the country.'

 Liberals in Senegal, and especially feminists, view the rise and spread

 of Muslim fundamentalism with unease.45 In Islam, as in all religions,
 fundamentalists stress the literal teaching of the holy scriptures, in this
 case the Qu'ran and the Sharia. Unlike Christianity, Islam makes no divi-
 sion between the sacred and the secular; thus it is as concerned with
 family and civic affairs as it is with the purely religious side of things.
 Since Islam views the family as the center of the Islamic social order,
 Islamic law especially addresses itself to this topic. Approximately one-
 third of the akham (legal injunctions of the Qu'ran) relate to the family
 and its proper regulation.46 The role of the woman is very clearly defined.
 Women are to be dependent on men and they achieve fulfillment only
 through subordination to men. Although the roles of husbands and wives
 are viewed as complementary rather than "<unequal," relationships in the
 family are hierarchical and patriarchal in nature. The Qu'ran states that
 men stand a step above women (Qu'ran 2:229). A woman's primary con-
 cern is to her family, and within it she has both rights and duties. Men
 also have obligations such as to support their wives. Wives have no
 reciprocal obligation to support their husbands; however, they forgo sup-
 port from their husbands if they disobey them.

 The Qu'ran states that a man may marry only as many wives as he
 can treat fairly and equitably (up to four) (Qu'ran 4:4). Under no cir-
 cumstances, however, may a woman marry more than one man at a time
 although she may remarry when divorced or widowed. The husband may
 divorce his wife at will although he is enjoined to do so only for a serious
 cause. The wife, however, may only be granted a divorce after court
 proceedings, where she is required to show that her husband did not
 meet a specific obligation to her (such as support). Upon divorce, women
 retain the right to their children only when they are infants or very
 young. According to one school of law a two-year-old boy and a seven-
 year-old girl pass automatically into the care of their father or an agnatic
 male relative.47

This content downloaded from 

            128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 21:38:24 UTC             

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Impact of Islam on Women in Senegal 361

 Women do have a right to their inheritance and to money that they
 themselves earn, but this provision still does not equalize their position.
 They inherit only one-half of what their brothers inherit (Qu'ran 4:12).
 Furthermore, their legal status is subordinate. The testimony of one man
 is matched, for court purposes, by that of two women (Qu'ran 3:283).

 This clear second-class position of women in the scriptures and in the
 Qu'ran is part of the message that the teachings of Islam communicated
 to the Senegalese peoples when the religion was being spread. This reli-
 gious doctrine, however, did not require the outward trappings of female
 subordination common in many Muslim countries. Senegalese women did
 not have to take the veil or live in seclusion. Their daily habits of work-
 ing in the fields, appearing freely in the market, and moving openly
 about public places were not changed by Islam.

 According to Islamic law, as briefly sketched here, women have lesser
 rights-regard to family position, inheritance, and legal matters gener-
 ally. In Senegal in the colonial period French law was mixed with cus-
 tomary practices and Muslim law. Muslim tribunes in the former
 communes made decisions in family matters for those who designated
 themselves Muslims. Non-Muslims had other options. In an effort to
 modernize and regularize their legal system, Senegalese politicians after
 independence passed a number of laws. Among the most notable are
 those relating to the Family Code of 1972. Under this set of provisions
 certain protections for women are provided in family matters decided by
 Muslim courts that were not under Muslim law in Senegal heretofore.
 The first of these is that husband and wife must agree concerning whether
 or not the marriage will be polygamous when their marriage takes place.
 The husband may not take another wife if this arrangement is not part
 of their marriage contract. Second, men may not divorce their wives at
 will but also need a defined reason and a court agreement. Third, unlike
 the situation existing previously, men are now required to provide for
 their divorced wives.

 The new Family Code was consistent with the public and international
 position taken by politicians in the 1960s and 1970s. Civil rights were
 granted equally to women as to men-the right to vote, the right to
 hold public office, the right to equal pay for equal work. In addition,
 women received the rights to a liberal maternity leave and to whatever
 social benefits the state provided (including membership in state coop-
 eratives). Indeed Senegal signed a series of international conventions
 guaranteeing the end of all discrimination against women, equal political
 rights for women, equality in employment, equal pay for work of equal
 value, and maternity protection.48 All these were ratified by the national
 legislature except for the overall guarantee to end all discrimination. All
 of these, together with the changes in the Family Code, were assertions
 by the government that the equality of women was in general acknowl-
 edged and would be upheld.

 Because Senegal had never officially been a Muslim state ruled by

 Muslim law in all domains, and because almost all of the legislators were
 practicing Muslims themselves, the import of these conventions and laws
 cannot be seen as direct counteraction against Islamic influence. In the
 case of family law as applied to Muslims, a fundamentalist interpretation

This content downloaded from 

            128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 21:38:24 UTC             

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 362 Lucy E. Creevey

 of what was intended in the Qu'ran was being replaced by a more lib-
 eral, but also avowedly Muslim, version. And, in fact, although the pub-
 lic position of the government is an important symbol for Senegalese
 women, the application of the laws to end discrimination has been uneven
 and sometimes nonexistent. Women who marry according to conventions
 that deny their husbands more wives are forced to agree to a change in
 the status of the marriage, if their husbands so will later on, in order to
 prevent a divorce after which they cannot count on their husband's full
 financial support. Husbands still can demand divorce more easily than
 women, who are moreover handicapped by the continuing custom of reg-
 istering all family property in the husband's name so that the divorcing
 wife has nothing once she is single again.49

 If traditional Muslim law sees women as subordinate to their hus-

 bands, fathers, and other male relatives and under the authority of the
 latter, the brotherhoods in Senegal go further: women count for nothing
 officially. Women may not be members in brotherhoods or hold any
 positions within them at all. Shaykhs and their assistants are all male;
 taalibe, or disciples, are also.5 Cheikh Tidjane Sy, a Senegalese Muslim
 and a close observer, said that women in the largest Wolof brotherhood
 (the Mouride) are "the most alienated of beings." They have no role
 except to provide labor in the fields and domestic work. He even pointed
 out that the major marabouts liked their wives to stay at home and some
 of them had taken to wearing the veil. He also said, however, that for
 most of the wives and daughters of marabouts this was not true: "They
 seem liberated, more inclined to show their youth and the beauty of
 their features."-5' Others have suggested that the inability of women to
 join in the brotherhoods "prompts them to form women's groups where
 they can exercise their own authority."52

 What, then, is the impact of Islam on the status of women in Senegal?

 So far it would appear that at the very least Islam has reinforced the
 second-class position of women that predated Islam in Senegal. To what
 extent it has done this is difficult to know, because we do not know
 exactly what pre-Islamic social norms included. Most available texts from
 the nineteenth century mention marabouts as already present in the pop-
 ulation and thus already influencing behavior and thought. But there is
 no evidence that women were equal to men in traditional society at any
 point. Their status depended on whether the ethnic group to which they
 belonged was matrilineal or patrilineal. It is a matter of debate as to
 whether groups that are now primarily patrilineal were once matrilineal
 and changed because of the influence of other ethnic groups much ear-
 lier in their history.5 But this fact may not be important to this argu-
 ment. Women had somewhat more power and influence in places where
 there were matrilineal societies, but even then, although property was
 handed down in the female line, it went to sons or brothers or uncles
 and was not directly handled by the women themselves. They still obeyed
 male authority in most matters. What seems to be more significant is
 that there is no clearly discernible pattern that Christian/animist Sen-
 egalese women were better able to take jobs, acquire schooling, or hold
 political office than Muslim Senegalese women except in specific areas
 with a singular regional history such as Ziguinchor. The Serer women in

This content downloaded from 

            128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 21:38:24 UTC             

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Impact of Islam on Women in Senegal 363

 Cap Vert, largely of Christian or animist matrilineal background, are not
 significantly better placed than Wolof women in jobs or in access to
 education.'

 If one looks at the largest ethnic group in Senegal, the Wolof, Islam
 seems to have a had at least a partially supportive influence for improv-
 ing the position of women. Abdoulaye-Bara Diop at IFAN (Institut Fon-
 damental d'Afrique Noire) points out that traditionally women were to
 find their fulfillment through their submission to men. Their worth or
 value was seen as derived from their behavior as wives who obeyed their
 spouse and did the jobs expected of them.55 The Wolof were bilineal,
 meaning that women as well as men passed on important traits. Char-
 acter and intelligence were seen as transmitted by the mother, for exam-
 ple, while courage came from the father's side. But the male or agnatic
 line was predominant in social and economic affairs, and inheritance went
 from men to their sons. Women did not inherit the land, the only sig-
 nificant asset transmitted in traditional society, not even from their
 husbands.56

 Islam, according to Diop, reinforced the respect of women for men
 but it had another impact as well: it led to the development of individ-
 ualism because it specified and protected individual rights for women as
 well as for men. Thus, in some sense Islam, along with the introduction
 of a monetary economy and the modernization of agricultural methods,
 destroyed the community/family unitary system.57 Under Islam, for
 example, women received rights that had never been acknowledged. For
 one thing, they were given the right to the money paid for their bride
 price; this was theirs to spend as they chose. Second, they received an
 inheritance from their fathers, even though they inherited only half of
 what their brothers did (and did not receive land). Previously they had
 not inherited anything. Third, they had an explicit right to what they
 earned themselves, a right they had enjoyed by custom but without the
 protection of a specific provision to that effect. Islam also gave women
 family rights they had /not had by limiting the number of wives a man
 might take and by givyitg the mother rights to her children and the father
 obligations to maintain them even if they were under the mother's care.'!
 Thus Islam, like the French, had a dual impact on the position of women.
 On the one hand, Islam reinforced their submission to men through its
 teachings and doctrines. On the other hand, Islamic law gave women
 individual rights and legal status that they had not enjoyed under the
 traditional system.

 Conclusion

 In Senegal women remain in a second-class position in terms of their

 rights and privileges in society. They are commonly seen as being under
 the protection and direction of their fathers, husbands, or brothers.
 Although the modern Senegalese state has passed various bills assuring
 the equality of all its adult citizens and protecting their rights, custom
 and tradition have maintained an attitude of superiority on the part of
 men. This attitude persists in the home, in the work place, and in pol-
 itics. Men retain the dominant positions. The situation is certainly chang-
 ing. As society modernizes and women receive more education and

This content downloaded from 

            128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 21:38:24 UTC             

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 364 Lucy E. Creevey

 training, they enter into different social, political, and economic posi-
 tions. Pressure from an articulate, educated feminist elite encourages the
 government to move faster in its provision of supports to women in their
 economic roles and to move more surely in its enforcement of the largely
 disregarded protections for women in the Family Code of 1972. But to
 date, women still face many barriers to their equal enjoyment of social,
 economic, and political institutions.

 How, then, can the role of Islam in determining the present position
 of women be evaluated? What is the impact of Muslim beliefs and prac-
 tices on Senegalese women? Evidence in this paper suggests that the
 influence of Islam was not unidirectional. Furthermore, it suggests that
 the position of women cannot be understood without a close study of
 traditional, pre-Islamic beliefs and family organization as well as of the
 influences of the West that were initially brought to Senegal by French
 colonization.

 It is certainly true that the teachings of the Qu'ran and the Sharia
 assume a subordinate position for women. Fundamentalist Christianity
 also prescribes a subordinate position for women, but this teaching is
 overshadowed by the more liberal interpretations of early doctrines prev-
 alent in the major nonfundamentalist branches of the religion. It may
 well be relevant to such a comparison that Christianity was changed and
 altered by the wave of industrialization taking place in the eighteenth
 and nineteenth centuries. Economy, society, and religion were trans-
 formed together. Protestantism and, more recently, Catholicism adapted
 their teachings to the wave of reform and liberalism. North Africa and
 the Middle East did not undergo the Industrial Revolution when Europe
 did and did not experience this concomitant set of changes, except through
 their contact with Europe. Liberalism and democracy, which grew out
 of the Industrial Revolution, were exported by the West as part of their
 wave of colonialism and imperialism.

 It would clearly be wrong to assume that the pattern of development
 followed in Europe in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries would
 have been followed in the twentieth century in Senegal had the latter
 adopted Christianity from Europe rather than Islam from North Africa.
 Nor can it be assumed that if an economic miracle should occur in Sen-
 egal and it were transformed into a wealthy industrial state, its culture
 would resemble the materialist, secular, and individualistic culture of the
 United States or the culture of France or that of any other country. This
 causal assumption that capitalism and modernity result in democracy is,
 as Robert Fatton observes, actually a description of a historical associa-
 tion rather than an explanation for the interrelationship among such fac-
 tors.59 There is, however, some relationship between the level of
 development as expressed by economic and social indicators in the Mid-
 dle East and North Africa and the preservation of a dominant traditional
 and fundamental form of religion. Perhaps the delay of industrialization
 in the Middle East has political roots. Some Muslim scholars argue that
 economic and social stagnation in the area is the result of an unfavorable
 balance of power that has kept the Islamic world under foreign domi-
 nation until very recently. This, then, is what has prevented the devel-
 opment of Islamic ideas and preserved Islamic teachings no longer suitable

This content downloaded from 

            128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 21:38:24 UTC             

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Impact of Islam on Women in Senegal 365

 to modern society.i' In any case, when one surveys the Muslim world
 in general (not even considering Khomeini-dominated Iran), it is not sur-
 prising that there the religious message regarding women places a rather
 more explicit emphasis on women as subordinate to men than would be
 the case in industrialized Western Christian nations.

 The evidence in Senegal, however, does not suggest that Muslim reli-
 gious doctrines or Muslim laws can be isolated as the determinants of
 the second-class situation in which women find themselves today in that
 country. Although on the one hand the message of subordination is clear,
 on the other Islam has brought with it an emphasis on individual rights
 that has benefited women. Traditional pre-Islamic customs placed women
 in a dependent position with no specific rights although they had some
 guarantees from traditional expectations concerning the obligations of other
 family members to them (husbands, sons, brothers, etc.). Thus the impact
 of traditional norms and beliefs in defining the role of women should not
 be understated.

 Islam, like all religions, adapts to the society in which it spreads. In
 various Muslim countries Islam has taken on different characteristics
 depending on who was in power and what goals were being pursued by
 the most powerful elements in society. Thus, some Muslim countries
 have reformed their laws in regard to women or recanted their reforms
 in a changed situation, all in the name of Islam.6" The conversion to
 Islam in Senegal did not imply the adoption of a standard set of social
 customs matching some specific set prevalent in Egypt, Saudi Arabia, or
 Morocco. Senegalese Muslim women, in contrast to women in the latter
 two societies, are not veiled or secluded and move freely in public places,
 expressing their opinions without hesitation.

 It is also the case that the influence of Islam perforce interacted with
 the French influence. Each affected the other and limited to some extent
 the ability of either to shape Senegalese society. The political dominance
 of the French meant that they controlled and drastically changed the
 economy. Further, the infusion of their ideas through their example of
 an appropriate lifestyle and the beginnings of a Western school system
 could not help but be important factors molding the new class of leaders
 who would take over Senegal at independence. Their ideas included a
 view of women as subordinate to men as well. Only in the postinde-
 pendence period did the French begin to attempt to support and assist
 women to find a more equal place in society. And this, as far as current
 evidence can tell us, never became a strong priority for them or for
 other Westerners who now were bribing and threatening Senegal with
 their aid offers.

 Islam is an important contributory factor in the development of Sen-

 egalese culture and society. The religion, however, is not one monolithic
 unit composed of a rigid set of doctrines. It can be interpreted and used
 in differing ways to reinforce quite contradictory positions on social rela-
 tions. Much depends on who holds power in Senegal. Continuing eco-
 nomic problems, the political situation in the Middle East, and changing
 alliances among Senegalese politicians may bring fundamentalist Islam to
 a more influential role in society. The forces of liberalism are still very
 evident in Senegal, however, and the voice of Senegalese feminists is

This content downloaded from 

            128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 21:38:24 UTC             

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 366 Lucy E. Creevey

 growing stronger. Whatever does happen, looking backward in Senegal,
 one can only say that Islam did affect society but it was not the only
 significant external factor. Further, like the colonial influences from the
 West, Islam both undermined and strengthened the position of women.
 Thus, its role is far more equivocal than many observers, struck by its
 fundamentalist teachings, will acknowledge.

 NOTES

 1. An early version of this paper was presented at the National Women's Studies
 Association Annual Meeting, Minneapolis, MN, June 1988. Parts of the discussion are
 drawn from Barbara Callaway and Lucy Creevey, "Women and the State in Islamic
 West Africa," in Women, the State, and Development, ed. Sue Ellen Charleton, Jane
 Everett, and Kathleen Staudt (Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1989),
 pp. 86-113.

 2. See Lucy Creevey Behrman, Muslim Brotherhoods and Politics in Senegal (Cam-
 bridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1970); Lucy Creevey, "Muslim Politics and Ten
 Years of Development in Senegal," Journal of Modern African Studies 15 (March 1977):
 261-77; and idem, "Muslim Brotherhoods and Politics in Senegal in 1985," Journal of
 Modern African Studies 23 (December 1985): 715-21.

 3. Val Moghadem, Commentary at a lecture on Iran and Afghanistan, 18 February

 1990, at the University of Connecticut, Storrs.

 4. Nadia Hijab, Womenpower: The Arab Debate on Wonen at Work (Cambridge:
 Cambridge University Press, 1988); Azar Tabari and Nahid Yageneh, eds., In the Shadow
 of Islam: The Women's Movement in Iran (London: Zed Press, 1982); Elizabeth Sanasarian,
 "Political Activism and Islamic Identity in Iran," in Women in the World: 1975-1985, The
 Women's Decade, ed. Lynne B. Iglitzin and Ruth Ross (Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO
 Press, 1986), pp. 207-24; Fatma Sabbah, Women in the Muslim Unconscious (New York:
 Pergamon, 1984); Azizah Al-Hibri, ed., Women and Islam (Oxford: Pergamon, 1982); Fatma
 Mernissi, "Professional Women in the Arab World: The Example of Morocco," Feminist
 Issues 7 (Spring 1987): 47-65; idem, Beyond the Veil: Male Female Dynamics in a Muslim
 Society (New York: John Wiley, 1975); John L. Esposito, Islam and Development: Religion
 and Sociopolitical Change (Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 1980); idem, Women
 in Muslim Family Law (Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 1982); Nawal El Saadawi,
 The Hidden Face of Eve: Women in the Arab World (London: Zed Press, 1980); Jane L.
 Smith, ed., Women in Contemporary Muslim Societies (London: Associated University
 Presses, 1980); Lois Beck and Nikki Keddie, eds., Women in the Muslim World (Cam-
 bridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1978); Joseph Ginat, Women in Muslim Rural
 Society: Status and Role in Family and Community (New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Books,
 1982).

 5. See Marnia Lazreg, "Gender and Politics in Algeria: Unraveling the Religious

 Paradigm," Signs 15 (Summer 1990): 755-80.

 6. Women are 51 percent of the resident population in Senegal (total 6,881,919) but
 less than 50 percent of the population in the major urbanized region around Dakar. Both
 men and women have a life expectancy of 52 years. Women have an average of 3.3 chil-
 dren. Republique du Senegal, Situation Economique, Edition: 1987 (Dakar: Direction de
 la Statistique, 1988), pp. 2, 9, 13. Hereafter, Situation Economique 1987.

 7. Sheldon Gellar, Senegal: An African Nation between Islam and the West (Boul-

 der, CO: Westview, 1982), p. 101; and Situation Economique 1987, p. 3.

 8. Situation Economique 1987, p. 43.
 9. Ziguinchor, which is south of Gambia, has a different ethnic composition than

 the rest of Senegal and a long tradition of Christian missionary schools.

 10. See Republique du Senegal, Situation Economique du Senegal, 1974 (Dakar:
 Direction de la Statistique, 1975), p. 56; hereafter, Situation Economique 1974; and Creevey,
 "Muslim Politics and Ten Years of Development in Senegal," pp. 261-77.

 11. Ruth Sivaud, Women-a World Survey (Washington: World Priorities, 1985),
 p. 37. Different sources show slightly different statistics: in 1985, 40.3 percent of the
 economically active population was female according to Department of International Eco-

This content downloaded from 

            128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 21:38:24 UTC             

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Impact of Islam on Women in Senegal 367

 nomic and Social Affairs, Demographic Estimates and Projections, 1950-2025 (New York:
 United Nations, 1988), p. 156.

 12. World Bank, World Development Report 1986 (New York: Oxford University Press,

 1986), p. 238.

 13. See Sivard, Women-World Survey, p. 16. See also Ruth Dixon-Mueller, Wom-
 en's Work in Third World Agriculture (Geneva: International Labor Office [ILO], 1985);
 Eleanor Leacock and Helen Safa, eds., Women's Work: Development and the Division of
 Labor by Gender (South Hadley, MA: Bergin and Garvey, 1986); Christine Oppong, ed.,
 Sex Roles, Population, and Development in West Africa: Policy Related Studies on Work
 and Demographic Issues (London: James Currey, 1989); and Claire Robertson and Iris
 Berger, eds., Women and Class in Africa (New York: African Publishing Company, 1986).

 14. Abdoulaye-Bara Diop, La famille wolof (Paris: Karthala, 1985), p. 7.
 15. Ibid., pp. 153-81; Bernhard Venema, "The Wolof of Saloum: Social Structure
 and Rural Development in Senegal" PUDOC, (Wageningen, 1978); also idem, "Male and
 Female Farming Systems and Agricultural Intensification in West Africa: The Case of the
 Wolof, Senegal," in The Household, Women, and Agricultural Development, ed. C.
 Presvelou and S. Spikers-Swart (Wageningen: H. Veenman en Zonen, 1980), pp. 27-34;
 and idem, "The Changing Role of Women in Sahelian Agriculture," in Women Farmers
 in Africa: Rural Development in Mali and the Sahel, ed. Lucy E. Creevey (Syracuse,
 NY: Syracuse University Press, 1986).

 16. Diop, La famille wolof, pp. 64-65. My translation from the French.
 17. Ibid., pp. 160-64; and Fama Hane Bana et al., "The Impact of Territorial Admin-
 istration Reform on the Situation of Women in Senegal," in Rural Development and Women
 in Africa (Geneva: ILO, 1984), p. 108.

 18. See John Waterbury, "The Senegalese Peasant: How Good Is Our Conventional
 Wisdom?" in The Political Economy of Risk and Choice in Senegal, ed. John Waterbury
 and Mark Gersovits (London: Frank Cass, 1987), pp. 47-89; see also Diop, La famille
 wolof, pp. 153-81.

 19. Bana et al., "Impact of Territorial Administrative Reform," p. 112.
 20. See Ester Boserup, Women's Role in Economic Development (New York: St. Mar-
 tin's, 1970). See also Creevey, Women Farmers in Africa, pp. 15-94; and Marie Angelique
 Savane, "The Effects of Social and Economic Changes on the Role and Status of Women
 in Sub-Saharan Africa," in Understanding Africa's Rural Households and Farming Sys-
 tems, ed. Joyce Lewinger Moock (Boulder, CO: Westview, 1986), pp. 104-24.

 21. Sivaud, Women-World Survey, p. 37.
 22. Ibid.; and Africa Research Bulletin (March, April, and May, 1988).
 23. Richard Vengroff and Alan Johnson, "Decentralization and the Implementation of
 Rural Development in Senegal: The Role of Rural Councils," Public Administration and
 Development 7 (1987): 273-88.

 24. Bana et al., "Impact of Territorial Administrative Reform," p. 108. Current observers
 suggest that women are beginning to be elected to these conseils rureaux in greater num-
 bers since the election in 1985 and in some instances have been made president although
 exact data are not yet available. Samba Djione, Director, ENEA (Ecole Nationale
 d'Economie Appliquee), interview with author, University of Connecticut, Storrs,
 9 October 1990.

 25. Sheldon Gellar, "Circulaire 32 Revisited: Prospects for Revitalizing the Sene-
 galese Cooperative Movement in the 1980's," in Political Economy of Risk and Choice,
 ed. Waterbury and Gersovitz, pp. 123-59.

 26. Ibid., pp. 151-52.
 27. See David Gamble, The Wolof of Senegambia, Ethnographic Survey of Africa,
 part 14, ed. Daryll Forde (London: International African Institute, 1957); or Diop, La
 famille wolof.

 28. Melanie Stephens, "Gender and Solidarity: A Village in Rural Senegal" (Senior
 honors thesis presented to the Department of Social Studies, Radcliffe College, Harvard
 University, 1987).

 29. See Echo, AAWORD/AAFARD Newsletter 1, nos. 2-3 (1986), pp. 9-13.
 30. Some women who are not primarily political have had a major impact on Sen-
 egalese intellectuals-see the writings of Mariama Ba, specifically So Long a Letter (Lon-
 don: Heinemann, 1986).

 31. Echo 1, nos. 2-3 (1986), pp. 1-13.
 32. Bana et al., "Impact of Territorial Administrative Reform," p. 112. As the author

This content downloaded from 

            128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 21:38:24 UTC             

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 368 Lucy E. Creevey

 puts it: "Although women are a very large majority of the registered voters, they always
 concede to men in the actual voting."

 33. Michael Crowder, Colonial West Africa: Collected Essays (London: Frank Cass,

 1978), p. 3.

 34. At the height of the slave trade, only 1,000 slaves a year were taken from Senegal
 in contrast to Dahomey, the Ivory Coast, Nigeria, and so on. Thus, it may be safe to
 assume that the impact of this trade on family structures was relatively slight. See John
 D. Hargreaves, West Africa: The Former French States (Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey:
 Prentice-Hall, 1967), pp. 39, 47.

 35. In the mid-1820s there were 260 "whites," 1,355 "men of color," 2,218 "freed

 natives," and 12,297 "captives" in St.-Louis and Goree. Ibid., p. 79, ffi.

 36. In 1936 there were 49,124 citizens and 1,640,500 subjects living in Senegal. See
 Ruth Schachter Morgenthau, Political Parties in French-speaking West Africa (Oxford:
 Clarendon, 1964), p. 34, fn.

 37. See ibid., especially pp. 125-62.
 38. See Catherine Overholt, Mary B. Anderson, Kathleen Cloud, and James E. Austin,
 Gender Roles in Development Projects: A Case Book (West Hartford, CT: Kumarian, 1985).
 39. The principal brotherhoods sending missionaries to Senegal were the Qadriyya
 and the Tidjaniyya, but in 1886, a Qadiri religious leader (marabout) founded the Mur-
 idiyya order, which became the most powerful brotherhood in Senegal.

 40. See Creevey Behrman, Muslim Brotherhoods and Politics in Senegal. For details
 on the spread of sufism in North and West Africa, see J. Spencer Trimingham, Islam in
 West Africa (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1959); Octave Depont and Xavier Coppolani,
 Les Confreries religieuses musulmanes (Alger: Adolphe Jourdan, 1897); and A. LeChatelier,
 L'Islam dans l'Afrique Occidentale (Paris: G. Steinhell, 1899).

 41. Lucy Creevey Behrman, "The Islamicization of the Wolof by the End of the
 Nineteenth Century," in Western African History: Boston University Papers on Africa,
 vol. 4, ed. Daniel McCall, Norman Bennett, and Jeffrey Butler (New York: Praeger, 1969).
 42. See Creevey Behrman, Muslim Brotherhoods and Politics in Senegal; Creevey,
 "Muslim Politics and Ten Years of Development in Senegal"; and idem, "Muslim Broth-
 erhoods and Politics in Senegal in 1985"; see also Gellar, Senegal, pp. 88-92; and Robert
 Fatton, Jr., The Making of a Liberal Democracy: Senegal's Passive Revolution 1975-1985
 (Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 1987), pp. 91-121.

 43. Situation Economique 1987, pp. 234-38, 313; World Bank, World Development

 Report 1990 (New York: Oxford University Press), pp. 182, 222.

 44. Gellar, Senegal, p. 123; and Fatton, Making of a Liberal Democracy,

 pp. 100-101.

 45. "Debates on Feminism in Senegal: Visions and Nostalgia," Echo 1, nos. 2-3 (1986),

 p. 9.

 46. Ahmad Kurshid, Family Life in Islam (Leicester: Islamic Foundation, 1974), p. 16.
 47. Noel Coulson and Doreen Hincheliffe, "Women and Law Reform in Contem-

 porary Islam," in Women in the Muslim World, ed. Beck and Keddie, pp. 44-45.

 48. Sivaud, Women-World Survey, p. 30.
 49. See Ba, So Long a Letter; see also Diop, La famille wolof, pp. 188-89.
 50. Donal B. Cruise O'Brien, The Mourides of Senegal: The Political and Economic

 Organization of a Muslim Brotherhood (Oxford: Clarendon, 1971), p. 85.

 51. Cheikh Tidjane Sy, La Confrerie Senegalaise des Mourides (Paris: Presence Afri-

 caine, 1969), pp. 201-2.

 52. Stephens, "Gender and Solidarity," p. 15.
 53. Interview by author with Samba Djione, Director, ENEA, 9 October 1990.
 54. See Diouf, who in "Femmes et migrations" does not find a significant ethnic
 variable in her work statistics. See also Diop, La famille wolof, for a discussion of the
 Muslim Senegalese attitude toward women's taking jobs.

 55. Diop, La famille wolof, p. 23.
 56. Ibid., pp. 15-30.
 57. Ibid., p. 181.
 58. Ibid., total discussion.
 59. Fatton, Making of a Liberal Denocracy, pp. 29-30.
 60. Ibrahim A. Ragab, "Islam and Development," World Development 8 (July/August

 1980): 513-22.

 61. Esposito, Women in Muslim Family Law, pp. 10-134.

This content downloaded from 

            128.227.206.226 on Thu, 10 Dec 2020 21:38:24 UTC             

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

