Int J Appl  Earth Obs Geoinformation 75 (2019) 15–28

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Int J Appl Earth Obs Geoinformation

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jag

Analysing spatial–temporal changes in rice cultivation practices in the
Senegal River Valley using MODIS time-series and the PhenoRice algorithm
Lorenzo Busettoa,⁎, Sander J. Zwartb,c, Mirco Boschettia

T

a Institute for Electromagnetic Sensing of the Environment, Italian National Research Council (CNR-IREA), Via Bassini 15, Milan 20133, Italy
b Faculty of Geo-Information Science and Earth Observation (ITC), University of Twente, Enschede, Netherlands
c Africa Rice Center (AfricaRice), Cotonou, Benin

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Rice
MODIS
PhenoRice
Phenology
Cropping intensity
Agro-practices
West Africa

In this study we used the PhenoRice algorithm to track recent variations of rice cultivation practices along the
Senegal River Valley. Time series of MODIS imagery with 250 m spatial resolution and a nominal 8-days fre-
quency were used as input for the algorithm to map the spatial and temporal variations of rice cultivated area
and of several important phenological metrics (e.g., crop establishment and harvesting dates, length of season)
for the 2003–2016 period in both the dry and the wet rice cultivation seasons. Comparison between PhenoRice
results and ancillary and ﬁeld data available for the Senegal part of the study area showed that the algorithm is
able to track the interannual variations of rice cultivated area, despite the total detected rice area being con-
sistently underestimated. PhenoRice estimates of crop establishment and harvesting dates resulted accurate
when compared with ﬁeld observations available for two sub-regions for a period of 10 years, and thus allow
assessing interannual variability and tracking changes in agronomic practices. An analysis of interannual trends
of rice growing practices based on PhenoRice results highlighted a clear shift of rice cultivation from the wet to
the dry season starting approximately from 2008. The shift was found to be particularly evident in the delta part
of the SRV. Additionally, a statistically signiﬁcant trend was revealed starting 2006 towards a longer dry season
(r2 = 0.81; Slope = 1.24 days y−1) and a shorter wet season (r2 = 0.65; Slope = 0.53 days y−1). These ﬁndings
are in agreement with expert knowledge of changes ongoing in the area. In particular the shorter wet season is
attributed to shortage of labor and equipment leading to a delay in completion of harvesting operations in the
dry season, which led to the adoption of short-duration rice varieties by farmers in the wet season to avoid risk of
yield losses due to climatic constraints. Aforementioned results highlight the usefulness of the PhenoRice al-
gorithm for providing insights about recent variations in rice cultivation practices over large areas in developing
countries, where high-quality up to date information about changes in agricultural practices are often lacking.

1. Introduction

Food security is one of the major global challenges in the face of a
continuously increasing world population and climate change, which
puts even more pressure on the natural resources we depend on.
Currently it is estimated that 815 million people were chronically un-
dernourished by 2016, an increase of 11% to the year before. Worst
aﬀected areas are Eastern Africa and Central Africa where respectively
one third and a quarter of the population are undernourished (FAO
et al., 2017). In 2015, the United Nations deﬁned seventeen sustainable
development goals (SDGs) for its 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Devel-
opment. Food security plays a prominent role in SDG2 “Zero Hunger”
and it is moreover claimed that the agriculture and food sector is key to
eradicate poverty (SDG1) for many (United Nations General Assembly,
2015). Accurate information on cropped areas, cropping seasons and

agricultural production is an essential component of the food avail-
ability pillar of food security. Understanding where, when and how
much food is produced and available supports governments, com-
modity traders and international donors in designing, implementing
and evaluating adequate policies and actions in a timely manner
(Laborte et al., 2017). In this context, remote sensing is considered an
important tool for gathering spatial-temporal data on crops, especially
in those areas where accurate, detailed and recent statistics are absent.
This requires development and validation of methods that are robust
and that can be deployed across scales and growing environments
(Whitcraft et al., 2015). Rice, being one of the three main staple crops
together with maize and wheat, feeds almost half of the world's popu-
lation and it is the most important food crop (Krush, 2005; FAO, 2014).
Rice is grown in over 163 million of hectares and in more than 100
countries located in temperate to tropical regions (Laborte et al., 2017).

⁎ Corresponding author.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jag.2018.09.016
Received 23 May 2018; Received in revised form 20 September 2018; Accepted 20 September 2018
0303-2434/ © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

L. Busetto et al.

Due to its utmost importance, rice prices are subject to high volatility:
for example, in 2008 the price for rice on the international trade mar-
kets quadrupled during the global food crisis. This leads to food in-
security and political instability in several nations in Africa, which is
the continent that is the largest importer of Asian rice. Nigeria, Côte
d’Ivoire and Senegal – all located in West Africa – are the three largest
importers of Asian rice in Africa and their demand for rice is increasing
faster than that of any other staple crop in West Africa due to increase
in population, urbanization and to dietary preferences (Seck et al.,
2010). Across Africa, national governments aim therefore to reduce
their dependencies on the international rice market through invest-
ments in the rice sector, many aiming self-suﬃciency in the very near
future (Wailes et al., 2015).

Remote sensing of paddy rice area has evolved quickly in recent
years due to the development of improved mapping algorithms, avail-
ability of remote sensing imagery from public archives and increased
processing capacity including the use of cloud computing opportunities
such as provided by Google Engine. In their thorough review of rice
mapping methods, Dong and Xiao (2016) distinguish four main groups
of mapping approaches. The ﬁrst two exploit single-date or multi-date
optical or radar imagery to identify rice ﬁelds exploiting simple or
complex supervised or unsupervised classiﬁcation algorithms, based on
spectral (multispectral reﬂectance or Vegetation Indices (VI)) [e.g.
Turner and Congalton, 1998; Pan et al., 2010; Nguyen et al., 2012] or
polarimetric features [e.g. Le Toan et al., 1997; Kurosu et al., 1997; Tan
et al., 2007]. The third group is based on the use of multitemporal data
acquired throughout an entire growing season to detect rice areas based
on the analysis of the temporal proﬁles of either VI or radar backscatter
[e.g. Gumma et al., 2014; Bouvet et al., 2009]. Finally, the fourth group
comprises phenology-based rice mapping methods, that recognize key
phases of rice development such as the agronomic ﬂooding of ﬁelds
prior to sowing or transplanting of rice seedlings, or the periods of
ﬂowering and harvesting [e.g. Xiao et al., 2002; Nelson et al., 2014;
Boschetti et al., 2015]. Such methods generally exploit high-frequency
time series of remote sensing derived vegetation and water indices,
mostly from the MODIS sensors, to detect ﬂooded ﬁeld conditions that
are followed by rapid crop development and a relatively sudden ﬁnal
decrease in VI values related to harvesting [e.g. Xiao et al., 2005, 2006;
Peng et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2015; Clauss et al., 2016; Boschetti et al.,
2017]. Until the launch of the Sentinel 1A and 1B sensors in 2014 and
2016 respectively, the use of high-frequency time series of radar ima-
gery, though potentially very useful for rice mapping and monitoring
purposes at regional scale in particular in cloudy areas, was instead
restricted by limited availability of imagery and high costs. In their
review (Dong and Xiao, 2016) also stress the increasing need for re-
gional to global rice maps to support analyses of food security, water
consumption patterns, climate change contributions through methane
emission and disease transmission. Existing global rice maps and da-
tabases are in fact usually based on statistical approaches and census
data. Examples are MIRCA2000 (Portmann et al., 2010), SPAM2005
(You et al., 2014), GAEZ (Fischer et al., 2013) and RiceAtlas (Laborte
et al., 2017). Subcontinental maps, all based on MODIS imagery, are
available for Asia (Gumma et al., 2014; Sun et al., 2009; Xiao et al.,
2005; Zhang et al., 2017) where 90% of all rice is produced, but none
for the other continents. Of the 44 rice mapping studies reviewed by
Dong and Xiao (2016) only 3 were conducted outside Asia of which
only one in Africa (Turner and Congalton, 1998).

1.1. From area mapping to multiyear seasonal crop monitoring

Besides for mapping rice areas, time series of satellite imagery can
also be used for deriving spatial information about rice cultivation
practices (e.g. dates of crop establishment and harvesting; water man-
agement), occurrence of phenological stages (e.g. emergence, tillering
or ﬂowering), cropping intensity (i.e., number of rice seasons) and their
interannual trends. Despite this, few studies have exploited multiannual

Int J Appl  Earth Obs Geoinformation 75 (2019) 15–28

satellite time series to analyze spatial–temporal patterns in rice culti-
vation areas. The majority of these studies focused on the analysis of
variations in rice area and cropping intensity [e.g. Dong et al., 2015;
Clauss et al., 2016; Nelson et al., 2014; Nguyen et al., 2015; Wu et al.,
2010], or identiﬁcation of diﬀerent cropping systems within large areas
[e.g. Nguyen et al., 2012]. Other studies aimed instead at character-
izing variations in water management practices related to rice culti-
vation schemes (Tornos et al., 2015) and their shifts in time [e.g.
Sakamoto et al., 2009; Ranghetti et al., 2018]. The attention was
however generally devoted to the possibility of producing thematic
information useful for characterizing rice cropping systems (e.g., ex-
tent; single vs double cropping systems; dry vs water seeding) and in
some cases monitoring their changes in time. Very few studies aimed
instead at mapping the spatial patterns in the dates of occurrence of
important agricultural practices or phenological stages over large areas.
This kind of information are generally derived on a per-pixel basis ex-
ploiting well-established time series analysis techniques generally based
on VI thresholding, derivative analysis or curve ﬁtting techniques
(Shihua et al., 2014). Boschetti et al. (2017) synthesized literature on
time series analysis for regional to continental rice monitoring and re-
vealed that only 6 out of 18 studies [e.g. Sakamoto et al., 2005;
Boschetti et al., 2009; Chumkesornkulkit et al., 2013; Nguyen et al.,
2012; Manfron et al., 2012; Suwannachatkul et al., 2014] addressed the
quantitative estimation of occurrence dates of agricultural practices/
phenological stages. Only one study addressed estimating the length of
the cropping season (Sakamoto et al., 2005). In general, these analyses
were performed for a single cropping season, and validated against
average statistics of crop establishment/harvesting dates or crop ca-
lendars, or against ﬁeld observations for a limited number of locations.
To the author's knowledge, only one study performed also an explicit
analysis of the temporal trends of such variables over a long period
(Singh et al., 2006). In that study, based on time series of NOAA-
AVHRR data, the authors identiﬁed a shift of 27 days in the occurrence
of peak crop growth stage in Punjab (India) from 1982 to 2000.

In this context, the PhenoRice algorithm (Boschetti et al., 2017) was
recently proposed as a rule-based algorithm speciﬁcally designed for
assessing the timing of the main rice growing practices (i.e., sowing/
transplanting and crop harvesting periods) with the explicit objective of
estimating the occurrence of such events over large areas. The algo-
rithm can be applied across diﬀerent rice growing conditions in terms of
genetic, environmental and management factors (G × E × M combi-
nations), and has been validated in three test sites in Italy, southern
India and northern Philippines diﬀering in terms of climatic conditions
– subcontinental temperate in Italy to tropical savanna in the other two
– and cropping systems – single harvest per year in Italy up to triple
harvests in Philippines.

1.2. Objectives of the study

The main objective of the present study was to demonstrate how
multitemporal, coarse resolution satellite time series can be used for
spatial–temporal monitoring of recent changes in rice cultivation
practices in the Sahel zone exploiting a 14 years long time series (from
2000 to 2016) of 250 meter resolution MODIS data. In particular, we
focused on rice production areas in the Senegal River basin in West
Africa which we justify for three important reasons. Firstly, as men-
tioned above, published research on rice mapping using remote sensing
in Africa is limited to only one publication and no study exists on the
estimation of timing of agro-practices. The semi-arid climatic condi-
tions under which rice is grown in the Senegal River Valley are extreme
with high temperature, low humidity, and low rainfall. Both jointly
provide a new application domain of the PhenoRice algorithm in terms
of climate diversity and global coverage. Secondly, rice production in
this area is highly dynamic. Since approximately 10 years ago, rice
cultivation on both the Mauritanian and Senegalese banks of the river
and its delta area is expanding rapidly through public and private

16

L. Busetto et al.

Int J Appl  Earth Obs Geoinformation 75 (2019) 15–28

investments. In the aftermath of the rice crisis in 2008 the government
of Senegal launched the ambitious program “The Great Oﬀensive for
Food and Abundance” (GOANA) running from 2008 to 2015. The goal
of the program was to achieve self-suﬃciency for the major crops that
are imported by making large investments in the agricultural sector
targeting productivity improvement, area expansion, mechanization
and commercialization. Senegal's National Rice Sector Development
strategy (Senegalese Ministry of Agriculture, 2009) prioritizes devel-
opment of irrigated rice through intensiﬁcation and area expansion. In
the framework of the GOANA program, large investments are being
made in the major irrigated rice production areas in the valley and delta
regions of the Senegal River targeting area expansion and rehabilita-
tion, and productivity improvement through use of modern varieties,
improved crop management, mechanization, dry season cultivation and
double cropping. Increasingly rice double cropping is reported and each
year more farmers cultivate rice in the dry season (February–July) ra-
ther than the wet season (December–February) due to higher attainable
yields. Thirdly, data about cropped areas and farmers practices required
for validation purposes are usually of low quality or simply not avail-
able in developing countries, or cover a short period of a few years and/
or small areas. However, in this study we were able to access two im-
portant databases that allowed us to perform a multiannual validation
of our results. Within this area, we deployed the aforementioned Phe-
noRice algorithm to: (i) investigate trends in rice cultivated area over
the considered 14 years’ time span analysing both main rice cultivation
seasons (dry and wet), and (ii) detect and quantitatively analyse var-
iations in rice farmer practices such as choice of agricultural season and
cropping intensity, occurrence of crop establishment (seeding/trans-
planting) and harvesting dates and length of season as an indicator of
varietal choice. Resulting data were compared with oﬃcial statistics of
rice cultivated areas and ﬁeld surveys collected over a period of 10
years. To our knowledge, this is one of the few studies which addresses
large scale rice crop monitoring in an African context, and the ﬁrst
attempting exploiting results of a multiannual analysis for identifying
recent variations in agricultural practices, in any context.

The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides an overview of
the study area (Senegal River Basin), followed by a description of the
satellite and ancillary data used for the application and validation of the
PhenoRice algorithm. We then provide a short description of the al-
gorithm and its parameterization, and of the methods used to validate
its results and analyze interannual trends of the main estimated para-
meters (rice area and timing of agro-practices). In the Results and
Discussion section we ﬁrst provide a comparison of PhenoRice results
with reference data. We then present results of an analysis of inter-
annual trends observed for the 2003–2016 period. Results highlight
how rice farming practices changed signiﬁcantly in a relatively short
period as result of government policies and global rice prices. In the
Conclusions section, we provide a summary of the main ﬁndings, as
well as some short considerations concerning the pros and cons of the
proposed methodology and considerations about possible future im-
provements.

2. Data and methods

2.1. Study area

The headwaters of the Senegal river originate in the highlands of
Guinea-Conakry that on average receive 2000 mm of rainfall annually.
For a small part the Senegal river then forms the border between
Mauritania and Mali, before it becomes the border river between
Senegal and Mauritania for a distance of more than 800 km until it
drains in the Atlantic Ocean (Fig. 1). Down from Bakel in Dagana the
river streams through an alluvial valley divided in the upper valley
(from Dembagane stream upwards) and the middle valley stretching
from Dembagane to Dagana. Below Dagana the river ﬂows into the
delta where the gradient is extremely slight. The middle valley and

delta sections of the Senegal River are located in the Sahel savanna
vegetation zone where the extremely low rainfall (200 mm/year) occurs
mainly during the single rainy season from July to September (Agnew
and Woodhouse, 2010). Soils in the valley and delta areas are dom-
inantly Eutric Fluvisols with medium to ﬁne-textured soil in the middle
valley and medium to coarse-textured soils in the delta (Segda et al.,
2005).

Irrigation systems were developed since the 1980s on both sides of
the river. Before construction of two major dams in 1987 large ﬂoods
manifested frequently in the valley and delta areas. The development of
the Manantali dam and reservoir on the upper part of the SRV allowed
stabilizing water ﬂow and allowed irrigation year-round. The Diama
dam was built instead approximately 27 km upstream from the mouth
of the river to prevent saltwater intrusion. Concurrently to completion
of the two dams, the inter-state Senegal River Basin Authority (OMVS)
was setup as a regulating institution for water resources between the
countries. By construction of the Manantali dam OMVS estimated that
300,000 ha could be irrigated, a potential that has not been reached till
date (Agnew and Woodhouse, 2010). Irrigation water is distributed to
the ﬁelds through canals using mainly electric water pumps. Except for
some large-scale commercial sugarcane estates near Richard Toll, the
irrigation schemes are relatively small in size ranging from 25 ha for
privately developed village schemes to 1000 ha for schemes originally
developed by the state, but gradually handed over to farmer organi-
zations (Wester et al., 1995). Farm sizes were reported to be 0.59 ha in
the middle valley and 2.43 ha in the delta (de Mey et al., 2012). Irri-
gated rice is the principal crop and it is either cultivated in the wet
season (July–December) or in the dry season (February–July). In the
short cold season (December–February) tomatoes and onions are also
being cultivated. On the banks of the river ﬂood recession agriculture is
practiced using the remaining soil moisture after the ﬂoods in August
and September to cultivate crops like watermelons, sorghum and beans
(Saarnak, 2003). A shift in cultivation practices has been observed in
recent years (Fig. 2). Farmers increasingly practice double rice cropping
or they switched from the wet season to the dry season (SAED/DDAC,
2015; van Oort et al., 2016) to beneﬁt from higher potential yields in
the latter (Dingkuhn and Sow, 1997). The actual rice yields in both wet
and dry season are typically between with 5.0 ton/ha in the delta and
5.6 ton/ha in the middle valley. These ﬁgures are well below the po-
tential yields of 9 ton/ha and 10 ton/ha of paddy rice respectively. The
primary factor for the low yields was explained as delayed crop es-
tablishment related to availability of credit, machinery and irrigation
water (Tanaka et al., 2015).

2.2. Data used in this study

2.2.1. Satellite data

The analysis was based on time series of MODIS data acquired over
the SRV in the 2003–2016 period. In particular, a combined time series
of TERRA and AQUA 16-day Composite Vegetation Indexes (MODIS
products MOD13Q1 and MYD13Q1, Didan (2015)) at 250 m resolution
was used as input for the PhenoRice algorithm. The original MODIS
images were downloaded from the NASA LPDAAC online archive and
preprocessed by means of the MODIStsp “R” package (Busetto and
Ranghetti, 2016), to produce time series of the EVI (Enhanced Vege-
tation Index, Huete et al., 1994) and NDFI (Normalized Diﬀerence
Flood Index, Boschetti et al. (2014)) spectral indexes, later used by
PhenoRice in order to identify rice crops and estimate the dates of oc-
currence of some key agricultural practices. EVI was directly extracted
from the corresponding MODIS SDS (Scientiﬁc Data Set) layer, while
NDFI was computed from MODIS reﬂectances in bands as 1 (Red) and 7
(SWIR), as follows:

NDFI

=

ρ
ρ

Red

Red

ρ
SWIR
ρ
SWIR

−

+

b
1
b
1

−

+

b
7
b
7

=

17

L. Busetto et al.

Int J Appl  Earth Obs Geoinformation 75 (2019) 15–28

Fig. 1. (a)Location of the Senegal river in West Africa; Zoom-in on the two validation areas: Boundoum (South-west of Rosso) (b) and Podor (c).

Senegalese public organisation for development and exploitation of
irrigated agriculture) was used to analyze the performance of
PhenoRice for identiﬁcation of rice areas and their variation across
years. The database contains oﬃcial statistics of irrigated rice area in
the wet and dry seasons for the entire Senegalese part of the Senegal
River Valley (SAED/DDAC, 2015). Secondly, a database of farm surveys
collected during the wet season between 2002 and 2010 (Diagne et al.,
2013) was used to validate PhenoRice crop establishment and har-
vesting dates. The database contains data about agro-practices related
to two separate areas: the Boundoum irrigation scheme in the delta
(surface of about 45 km2, located approximately 30 km south-west of
Rosso, see Fig. 1), and a larger area around the city of Podor in the
middle valley covering the irrigation schemes of Fanaye, Nianga, Podor
and Thiele Boubacar (surface of about 380 km2). Data was collected by
staﬀ from the Africa Rice Center, SAED and the local non-governmental
organization UJAK (Union des Jeunes Agriculteurs de Koyli-Wirnde
(Tanaka et al., 2015)) by interviewing (as much as possible) the same
set of approximately 100 rice farmers equally divided between the two
study zones over a period of 9 consecutive years. While the accuracy of
the survey data concerning crop establishment and harvesting dates can
be considered very high, its positional accuracy is unfortunately less
satisfactory. Geographic coordinates of the monitored farmers’ ﬁelds
are not available, and the only positional information is the name of the
village to which each ﬁeld belongs. For the sake of our analyses, data
were therefore spatially aggregated for the Boundoum irrigation area
(delta) and the Podor zone (middle valley) by averaging the informa-
tion available for each year.

Table 1 provides a short summary of the datasets used.

Fig. 2. Reported irrigated rice area in the Senegal River Valley between 1999
and 2013 (Senegal only; SAED/DDAC (2015)).

NDFI is sensitive to surface water content, with values greater than zero
corresponding generally to areas characterized by the presence of
standing water (Boschetti et al., 2014).

2.2.2. Validation data

Two databases were used to validate PhenoRice results. Firstly, a
database of reported rice cultivated area provided by SAED (Société
Nationale d’Aménagement et d’Exploitation des Terres du Delta du
Fleuve Sénégal et des Vallées du Fleuve Sénégal et de la Falémé –

Table 1
Characteristics of the main datasets used in this study.

Dataset

Time span

Spatial extent

Source

MOD13Q1/MYD13Q1 MODIS time series
Boundaries of areas equipped with irrigation

infrastructure

Cultivated rice area statistics
Farmer reported dates of crop establishment and

harvesting in the wet season

Digital boundaries of the two surveyed areas

2003–2016
2015

1965–2015
2000–2010

–

Entire Senegal River catchment
Entire Senegal River catchment

Didan (2015)
Africa Rice Center (Zwart, 2017)

Senegal River Valley, Senegal side only
Two areas in Senegal: Boundoum irrigation
scheme (delta), Podor zone (middle valley)

SAED/DDAC (2015)
Africa Rice Center, SAED, UJAK (Diagne et al., 2013; de
Mey et al., 2012)
This study, based on information from reports, Google
Maps and village names from the database

18

L. Busetto et al.

2.3. Methods

2.3.1. Estimation of rice area and timing of agro-practices

The PhenoRice algorithm (Boschetti et al., 2017) was applied on
MODIS time series described in Section 2.3 with the objective of ana-
lysing the interannual variations of phenological metrics such as crop
establishment, ﬂowering and harvesting dates over large areas. Phe-
noRice estimates key dates in rice crop cultivation through analysis of
time series of spectral indices (SIs) derived from moderate resolution
satellite imagery. It was demonstrated to provide reliable estimates of
the spatial variability of the dates of crop establishment and ﬂowering
over large areas, irrespective of the characteristics of rice cultivation in
diﬀerent environments (Boschetti et al., 2017; Setiyono et al., 2018).
Conceptually, PhenoRice works in two steps: (i) detection of rice crop
pixels and (ii) estimation of phenological metrics. In short, for each
MODIS pixel (except those eventually excluded by an ad-hoc mask),
PhenoRice ﬁrst determines if it has a high probability of belonging to a
rice area. This is achieved by using a rule-based method which classiﬁes
a MODIS pixel as a rice crop if: (1) a clear and unambiguous ﬂood
condition is detected on the basis of NDFI values. A pixel is considered
ﬂooded in a given date if its NDFI value is greater than a user-speciﬁed
threshold (NDFIthresh – see Table 2); (2) the EVI signal (smoothed using a
two-stage Savitzky and Golay ﬁlter) following the identiﬁed ﬂooding is
consistent with what expected for a rice crop (e.g., a rapid growth,
followed by a relatively stationary peak period and a rapid decrease
related to yellowing and harvesting). If a pixel is considered to belong
to rice, phenological dates’ estimation is conducted. In particular, (i)
the date corresponding to the strongest minima of the EVI curve ob-
served in proximity of the identiﬁed ﬂooding is considered as a proxy of
crop establishment (Start of Season – SOS), (ii) the midpoint date for
which the EVI signal remains constantly above 90% of the min/max
range as a proxy of crop ﬂowering (Peak of Season – POS), and (iii) the
date at which the signal drops below a user-deﬁned percentage
threshold of the min/max range as a proxy of crop harvesting (End of
Season – EOS). The total length of the rice crop season (TLS) from es-
tablishment to harvesting is also computed as the diﬀerence between
EOS and SOS. A more detailed description of the PhenoRice algorithm
and its performance can be found in Boschetti et al. (2017). It is worth
noting that, with respect to PhenoRice original implementation, an
additional criteria for rice identiﬁcation was introduced. The new cri-
teria checks the estimated TLS, and only retains pixels which season
length is within a speciﬁed range. Additionally, with respect to para-
meterizations used for analyses reported in Boschetti et al. (2017), the
NDFI threshold for ﬂood detection was lowered from 0 to −0.1 This
choice was motivated by the fact that ﬂooded rice ﬁelds in SRV (in
particular in the dry season) are often adjacent to bright soils. This
reduces the eﬀect of ﬂooding on the NDFI signal in particular on the
boundaries of ﬂooded areas, thus aﬀecting PhenoRice capabilities for
rice crop detection. Lowering the NDFI threshold was found to reduce

Int J Appl  Earth Obs Geoinformation 75 (2019) 15–28

this problem, while not introducing evident misclassiﬁcation problems.
A useful feature of PhenoRice is that it allows to detect multiple
growing seasons for a pixel within a cropping year. This is achieved by
splitting the time series into as many as four periods, each representing
a possible period when rice ﬂowering may occur, and conducting a
separate analysis on each one. In the case of the present analysis the
algorithm was parameterized so to consider two possible rice seasons:
the dry season (possible ﬂowering period between March 1 and June
30), and the wet season (possible ﬂowering period between between
August 1 and December 31). The other processing parameters used for
PhenoRice parameterization are reported in Table 2, along with a short
description of their meaning (for further details, see Boschetti et al.
(2017)). To reduce computation time and avoid processing large desert
areas alongside the river, the processing was limited to MODIS pixels
located within areas equipped with irrigation infrastructure, as identi-
ﬁed in Zwart (2017).

PhenoRice original outputs were successively post-processed to ex-
tract multi-temporal raster maps at 250 m resolution for SOS, POS, EOS,
VLS and TLS used as the basis for later geospatial processing aimed at
comparing PhenoRice results with ancillary data and at extracting and
analyzing spatial–temporal trends, as explained in the next sections. All
of
these processing were performed using the R Language and
Environment for Statistical Computing (R Core Team, 2018), exploiting
in particular packages raster (Hijmans, 2017), sp (Bivand et al., 2013), sf
(Pebesma, 2018), ggplot2 (Wickham, 2016) and sprawl (Busetto and
Ranghetti, 2018).

2.3.2. Comparison of PhenoRice results against oﬃcial rice area statistics
and agro-practices ﬁeld data

PhenoRice results were compared with ancillary data to verify the
performance of the algorithm in tracking the interannual variations of
both rice area and of establishment and harvesting dates across the
SRV. We ﬁrst compared the total rice cultivated area detected by
PhenoRice for the two rice seasons for the period 2003–2016 (14 years,
28 rice seasons) with the oﬃcial reported rice cultivated area using a
linear regression analysis. Successively, we compared the phenological
metrics derived by PhenoRice with the available ﬁeld data concerning
establishment and harvesting dates described in Section 2.2.2. Since the
exact location of the ﬁeld samples was unknown, only an analysis ag-
gregating the data was possible. This was conducted by computing and
comparing the averages of both the ground-truth dates and PhenoRice
estimates, for the two main areas where ﬁeld data were collected.
PhenoRice ability to identify trends in agro-practices was veriﬁed by
analyzing results of a OLS linear regression analysis between PhenoRice
and ﬁeld average dates (r2, slope, intercept and p value), while accuracy
of the estimates was assessed by computing the mean error (ME) and
root mean square error (RMSE).

Table 2
PhenoRice parameterization used for the analysis (see Boschetti et al. (2017) for further details concerning the meaning of the diﬀerent parameters).

Dataset

Value

Description

Analyzed period
Flowering periods

EVImax_th
EVImin_th
NDFIth [–]
winﬂ [days]

2003–2016
Dry season: 1 March–30 June
Wet season: 1 August–31 December
0.35
0.25
−0.1
25

windecr [days]
decrth [%]
Δtmin [days]
Δtmax [days]
Season length [days] ≥100 and ≤170

90
0.55
40
90

Years analyzed
Potential ﬂowering periods (start–end)

Minimum value needed for considering a relative EVI maximum as corresponding to a ﬂowering period
Maximum value needed for considering a relative EVI minimum as corresponding to a sowing period
Minimum NDFI threshold used to identify ﬂooded conditions
Maximum possible diﬀerence allowed between a minimum and the closest ﬂooding detected based on NDFI for a
pixel to be mapped as rice
Maximum possible diﬀerence allowed between POS and EOS for a pixel to be mapped as rice
Percentage decrease threshold (with respect to the min/max range) used for EOS estimation
Minimum possible diﬀerence allowed between SOS and POS for a pixel to be mapped as rice
Maximum possible diﬀerence allowed between SOS and POS for a pixel to be mapped as rice
Possible range of TLS allowed for a pixel to be mapped as rice

19

L. Busetto et al.

Int J Appl  Earth Obs Geoinformation 75 (2019) 15–28

Fig. 3. Maps of rice cultivated area, crop establishment date, ﬂowering dates and harvesting dates estimated by PhenoRice for the dry (left panels) and wet (right
panels) seasons of 2016 (data were cumulated (for area) or averaged (for the other parameters) over a regular hexagon grid with a cell size of 25 km2 to allow a better
visualization).

2.3.3. Analysis of interannual variations in rice area, rice cropping intensity
and rice growing practices

PhenoRice results were ﬁnally used to analyze the trends in rice
cultivation practices occurred in SRV during the last 15 years. We ﬁrst
analyzed the detected changes in rice cultivation periods, by computing
the relative proportions of areas detected by PhenoRice as being
cropped with rice in the dry, in the wet and in both seasons, for each
analyzed year. The analysis was conducted both on the entire SRV and
on the cells of a regular hexagonal grid of approximately 25 km2 of
surface, in order to be able to depict the spatial variability of the oc-
curred changes. Successively, the existence of statistically signiﬁcant

temporal trends in rice cultivation practices (besides the shift towards
dry season cropping) was tested by performing a linear OLS regression
analysis between Year and the yearly averages of the main PhenoRice
phenological metrics (crop establishment, ﬂowering and harvesting
dates, and total season length).

3. Results and discussion

Application of the PhenoRice algorithm allowed to derive maps of
estimated rice area and phenological metrics for the 2003–2016 period.
Results obtained for 2016 are shown as an example in Fig. 3, which

20

L. Busetto et al.

Int J Appl  Earth Obs Geoinformation 75 (2019) 15–28

highlights the usefulness of PhenoRice outputs for tracking the spatial
and temporal variability of rice cultivation practices for what concerns
cultivated area and timing of crop establishment, ﬂowering and har-
vesting in each season. From the ﬁgure, it is for example evident how
dry season rice cultivation is currently concentrated mostly in the north
western part of the SRV, with typical crop establishment in Februar-
y–March. Wet season cultivation is instead more widespread along the
river valley.

3.1. Comparison of PhenoRice results with ancillary data

3.1.1. Rice cultivated area

Results of the comparison between oﬃcial statistics of rice culti-
vated areas reported by SAED/DDAC (2015) and PhenoRice estimates is
shown in Fig. 4.

The ﬁgure shows that PhenoRice rice areas are reasonably corre-
lated with the SAED (r2 = 0.71), but also that detected rice area is

Fig. 4. Comparison between oﬃcial statistics (SAED/DDAC, 2015) of cultivated
rice area during the wet and dry season in Senegal and PhenoRice estimates.

Fig. 5. Time series of MODIS and ﬁeld average crop establishment (top panels) and harvesting (bottom panels) dates for the wet season (error bars correspond to
plus/minus one standard deviation of MODIS estimates and available ﬁeld data). Left panels show results of the comparison for the Boundoum area, right panels
those for the Podor area.

21

L. Busetto et al.

Int J Appl  Earth Obs Geoinformation 75 (2019) 15–28

Table 3
Statistical comparison between PhenoRice and ﬁeld average crop establishment and harvesting dates. Slope, intercept r2 and p: results of a linear regression analysis
between MODIS and ﬁeld dates; ME: mean error; RMSE: root mean squared error (see Supplementary Materials for a graphical representation).

Site

Metric

Boundoum (delta)
Podor (middle valley)
Boundoum (delta)
Podor (middle valley)

Establishment date
Establishment date
Harvesting date
Harvesting date

Slope

0.829
1.675
0.659
1.507

Intercept

2351.768
−9271.532
4731.358
−7032.646

r2

0.870
0.799
0.610
0.826

p

0.001
0.003
0.022
0.002

ME

4.067
−0.770
0.006
−5.324

RMSE

5.408
8.240
6.197
8.140

was capable to identify a representative sample of rice cultivated pixels
within the complex study area, and recognize the major shift towards
dry season cultivation started in 2008.

3.1.2. Timing of agro-practices

Results of the comparison between PhenoRice estimates and timing
of agronomic practices derived from ﬁeld surveys are shown in Fig. 5
and Table 3. PhenoRice average estimates of wet season crop estab-
lishment and harvesting dates show good agreement with average re-
ported dates for the years 2003–2010. In the Boundoum area, Phe-
noRice estimates of crop establishment were found to be very well
correlated with ﬁeld data (r2 = 0.89; p < 0.01) and also very accurate,
though slightly overestimated (ME = 4.06; RMSE = 5.41). Harvesting
dates shows a lower correlation (r2 = 0.615; p < 0.02), with almost no
BIAS and an RMSE of about 6 days. Results obtained in the Podor va-
lidation area are somehow less satisfactory: despite high correlations (r2
equal to 0.81 and 0.82 for establishment and harvesting dates, re-
spectively), the RMSE increases in this case to about 8 days for both
establishment and harvesting dates (see also Fig. S1 in Supplementary
Materials for a graphical representation of results of the regression
analysis). This minor diﬀerence in performances can be explained by
diﬀerences in both the available ﬁeld data and the landscapes of the
validation areas. Although the exact location of ﬁeld observations was
unknown, ﬁeld data for the Boundoum site were collected within a
relatively small area characterized by a large extension of contiguous
rice ﬁelds (AfricaRice, pers. commun., 2016). Conversely, in the case of
Podor ﬁeld data were collected over a much larger and heterogeneous
area consisting of several irrigation schemes (see Fig. 1). This hetero-
geneity is testiﬁed by the large variability of ﬁeld-observed establish-
ment and harvesting dates depicted in Fig. 5 – bottom panel, and may
aﬀect the accuracy of PhenoRice estimates due to mixed pixel eﬀects.
Accuracy of retrieved sowing dates is consistent with those reported in
the original PhenoRice publication (Mean Error between −0.24 and
12.8 days and MAE between 5.26 and 13.14 days, depending on vali-
dation area). Those accuracies were reported to be generally higher
with respect to the few studies available that compared crop estab-
lishment dates from moderate resolution remote sensing data and ﬁeld
observations [e.g. Chumkesornkulkit et al., 2013; Suwannachatkul
et al., 2014; Sakamoto et al., 2005]. It is however important to un-
derline the very diﬀerent validation scheme exploited in the present
work. In the aforementioned studies accuracy was assessed on a single
year of data by comparing EO-based estimations against high-resolution
reference sowing dates maps or ﬁeld information available over mul-
tiple points. In this study we instead compared ﬁeld and EO sowing
dates averaged over two relatively large areas, but for several years. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study which analyzed the
accuracy of remote sensing based methods for identifying interannual
variations of rice crop phenometrics through comparison with multi-
annual ﬁeld data. Despite the limitations of the available validation
datasets due to the unavailability of the precise geographical co-
ordinates of the ﬁeld information (see Section 2.2.2), our results suggest
that the obtained accuracy is suﬃcient for characterizing year-to-year
changes in sowing and harvesting dates.

In summary, results reported in Sections 3.1.1 and 3.1.2 testify that
PhenoRice is able to consistently map a signiﬁcant share (about 60%,

Fig. 6. Changes in rice area in the dry and wet season in Mauritania and
Senegal from 2003 to 2016 estimated by PhenoRice.

consistently lower than the oﬃcial one. This tendency towards under-
estimation was reported before for test areas analyzed in the ﬁrst
PhenoRice publication (Boschetti et al., 2017), and is attributed to three
main reasons. First, it is important to remind that when coarse re-
solution satellite data are used for mapping the so called “low resolu-
tion bias” is expected (Boschetti et al., 2004), leading to either under- or
over-estimation of areas when compared with higher resolution in-
formation. Second, it should be noted that PhenoRice main focus is on
allowing an accurate estimation of phenological metrics related to rice
growing practices (e.g., crop establishment dates). The algorithm was
therefore implemented so to be rather conservative, and retains only
those pixels for which the analysis of the satellite time series provide a
rather strong certainty of their belonging to rice cultivated areas. Fi-
nally, the characteristics of the study area further exacerbate this ten-
dency towards underestimation, due to the fact that rice ﬁelds have
generally small dimensions and are often adjacent to very arid/desert
areas. This introduces further problems for rice identiﬁcation from
coarse resolution satellite data due to the presence of mixed pixels.
Despite aforementioned limitations, Fig. 4 shows that interannual var-
iations of rice area are very correlated with oﬃcial data in the dry
season (r2 = 0.90; p < 0.01). Correlation is instead very low in the wet
season. This is probably due to the frequent and persistent cloudiness
observed in the area during the crop establishment period (average
accumulated precipitation 500 mm over August and September, with
more than 90% of days with overcast or partly-cloudy conditions). This
leads to a lower quality of the satellite signal in the wet season, and may
prevent PhenoRice from detecting the signal related to agronomic
ﬂooding particularly in years with persistent cloud cover during the
period of ﬂooding of ﬁelds for land preparation.

The performance of PhenoRice to detect rice areas appears lower
compared to previous PhenoRice case studies described in Boschetti
et al. (2017), and to other studies that compared rice cultivated areas
derived from coarse resolution data with oﬃcial statistics or higher
resolution datasets [e.g. Gumma et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2015, 2017;
Clauss et al., 2016]. However, the results demonstrate that PhenoRice

22

L. Busetto et al.

Int J Appl  Earth Obs Geoinformation 75 (2019) 15–28

Fig. 7. Variations in detected rice area and crop intensity between 2003 and 2016. In the bottom panels, green colors correspond to areas cultivated only in the wet
season, red colors to areas cultivated only in the dry season, and blue colors to areas where a signiﬁcant presence of double rice seasons was detected. (For
interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of the article.)

on average) of rice cultivated areas within the SRV and, more im-
portantly, to correctly depict the relative interannual variations of the
timing of agro-practices observed in the reference data, in the two
seasons. In particular, considering the 8-days temporal resolution of the
MODIS data used as inputs and the relatively low spatial resolution of
MODIS data with respect to average rice ﬁeld dimensions, we consider
the aforementioned results to be really good, allowing the use of Phe-
noRice maps for spatial–temporal analysis of variations of rice crop
practices in the SRV.

3.2. Analysis of interannual variations of rice cultivated area and cropping
intensity

PhenoRice analysis of the recent period 2003–2016 highlights the
changes occurred in SRV rice cultivation practices. As clearly shown in
Figs. 6 and 7 , the practice of cultivating rice only in the wet season is
rapidly declining. This is particularly evident in rice cultivation areas in
the delta zone (i.e. downstream of Dagana). In those areas, PhenoRice
results evidence a shift towards cultivation in the dry season, as well as
the introduction of rice double-cropping (Fig. 7, bottom panels).

The variations in rice cultivation practices occurred in the analyzed
period can also be observed from the analysis of Fig. 8. The ﬁgure
shows the average and 5th and 95th percentiles of the EVI times series
corresponding to MODIS pixels detected as rice at least in one of the

seasons in 2003, 2009 and 2016. Right panels show the temporal
proﬁles averaged for the entire SRV area, while right panels are aver-
aged for the Boundoum irrigation scheme only. The ﬁgure also shows
the average and 95th percentile of the NDFI signal, for the same areas,
as well as the average estimated crop establishment, ﬂowering and
harvesting dates.

When looking at the average for the SRV (Fig. 8, left panels), the EVI
and NDFI signals in 2003 are representative of what can be expected for
a single rice crop in the wet season. Average EVI starts increasing
around the middle of August, in concurrence with a strong increase of
NDFI (which testiﬁes ﬂooding of the ﬁelds). The situation starts already
changing in 2009, when the EVI average signal already shows signs of a
switch towards dry-season or double-season cultivation. In particular,
the strong increase in the 95th percentiles of EVI in spring testiﬁes the
“start” of adoption of the new agro-practices. Moreover, the ﬂattening
of the 5th percentile EVI curve in autumn testiﬁes the presence of both
areas cultivated only in the wet season (“ﬂat” 5th percentile curve in
spring/summer) and only in the dry season (“ﬂat” 5th percentile curve
in autumn/winter). Additionally, the signiﬁcant increase of average
NDFI values (in particular, of the 95th percentile of the curve) depicts
the detection of ﬂooded areas in spring, due to the ﬂooding of rice
ﬁelds. This behavior is further emphasized in 2016, where the strong
increase of the EVI average and 95th percentile curves in spring and the
corresponding reduction in autumn testiﬁes the gradual increase of dry

23

L. Busetto et al.

Int J Appl  Earth Obs Geoinformation 75 (2019) 15–28

Fig. 8. EVI and NDFI times series and average estimated crop establishment, ﬂowering and harvesting dates for MODIS pixels detected as rice in at least one of the
seasons in 2003, 2009 and 2016 for the entire SRV area (left panels) and in the Boundoum validation area (right panels).

season cultivation. The aforementioned observed changes are further
outlined when focusing on the Boundoum validation area (Fig. 8, right
panels). While the situation in 2003 is similar to that observed for the
entire SRV, the 2009 time series highlights a faster adoption of dry
season cultivation. The 2016 curves also show how rice cultivation in
this area switched almost entirely towards dry season or double season
cultivation, with practically no detected rice areas showing signs of
being cropped only in the wet season: this is testiﬁed by the fact that the
5th percentile EVI curve shows high and close to the average values in
spring, while it is almost ﬂat in autumn.

3.3. Interannual variations of timing and length of rice seasons

Fig. 9 shows the frequency distribution of PhenoRice annual esti-
mates of crop establishment and harvesting dates, from 2003 to 2016.
The strong increase of rice cultivation in the dry season is testiﬁed by
the shift, starting from 2008, from a unimodal (rice cultivated only in
the wet season) to a bimodal distribution, with rice cultivated also in
the dry season. This shift has been motivated by the higher rice yields
achievable in the dry season in a large part of the basin, which led
government organizations to promote the exploitation of available
water resources in the dry season for rice cultivation.

Results of the analysis of temporal trends for the diﬀerent MODIS-

24

L. Busetto et al.

Int J Appl  Earth Obs Geoinformation 75 (2019) 15–28

Fig. 9. Frequency distribution of PhenoRice estimated annual crop establishment (a) and harvesting (b) dates for the dry and wet seasons between 2003 and 2016.

derived phenological metrics in the 2003–2016 period is shown in
Fig. 10. The temporal span of the regression analysis was limited to
2006-onwards, due to the very low number of pixels detected by Phe-
noRice in the dry-season prior to 2006 as a consequence of the marginal
adoption of dry season cultivation, which hampers the reliability of the
estimates. To be able to link trends observed in the dry season to those
observed in the wet season, we decided to limit the regression analysis
for the wet season to the same period (2006–2016). Results highlight
signiﬁcant trends in the average estimated length of the growing sea-
sons: the average length of the dry season is increasing (r2 = 0.81;
slope = 1.24 days y−1; p < 0.01), while a decreasing trend in the wet
season is observed (r2 = 0.65; slope = −0.53 days y−1; p < 0.01)
(Fig. 10, bottom panels). The trend observed in the dry season appears
to be driven by a tendency towards later harvesting (r2 = 0.45;
slope = 1.18 days y−1; p < 0.05), while the shortening of the wet
season is driven by a delay in crop establishment (r2 = 0.49; slope =
1.54 days y−1; p < 0.05), with a lower and less signiﬁcant delay ob-
served in harvesting dates (r2 = 0.32, slope = 0.99 days y−1, p < 0.1).
The observed changes in the timing of agro-practices and season
length are explained by a combination of climatic constraints for rice
cultivation and lack of resources. As the area cultivated in the dry
season increases, so do the demand for labor, water and equipment for
harvest. Since these resources are limited, this leads to a delay in
completion of harvesting operations and thus to the observed increase
in average TLS in the dry season (Tanaka et al., 2015). However, rice
cultivation in the wet season is climatically bound by a cold period
during January and February. For this reason, to avoid yield penalties
farmers cannot harvest later than in December. However, due to the
aforementioned delay in harvesting, in the double cropping systems the
period between the harvest of the dry season and land preparation for
the wet season is very short. Consequently, with the expansion of
double cropping areas farmers often cannot comply with recommended
cultivation practices for medium-duration varieties for reasons of
shortage of labor and equipment, and they increasingly opt for shorter-
duration varieties. Particularly in the river delta the preferred medium-

long variety Sahel134 is therefore gradually being substituted by the
short duration Sahel108 variety that requires only 105 days to maturity.
This explains well the observed decrease in average length of the
growing season in the wet season. It is also worth noticing that in recent
years an increase of air temperature in the October-December period
has been observed that has led to a shortening of the length of the wet
season. However, according to crop growth simulations conducted by
Van Oort (pers. commun., 2018) this increase in air temperatures is not
suﬃcient to explain the relatively large season shortening detected in
this study, that can therefore be explained solely by the aforementioned
variations in agro-practices.

4. Conclusions

In this study, we used the PhenoRice algorithm to track recent
variations of rice cultivation practices along the Senegal River Valley
over a 14-year period (2003–2016). Time series of MODIS imagery with
250 m spatial resolution and a nominal 8-days frequency were used as
inputs for the algorithm. The spatial and temporal variations of rice
cultivated area, crop establishment and harvesting dates, length of
season, and cropping intensity were mapped for both the dry and the
wet seasons. Comparisons between PhenoRice results and ancillary and
ﬁeld data available for the Senegal part of the study area showed that
the algorithm was able to track the spatial–temporal trends of rice
cultivated area, cropping seasons and timing of agro-practices, despite
consistently underestimating the total rice area. The analysis of inter-
annual trends of rice growing practices based on PhenoRice results
highlighted a clear shift of rice cultivation from the wet to the dry
season that starts from 2008. The shift was found to be particularly
evident in the middle valley and delta zones of the SRV. The analysis
also revealed a statistically signiﬁcant increase in the length of the dry
season since 2006 and a corresponding decrease in the length of the wet
season. These changes are attributed to the increase of area under rice
double cropping, notably in the delta zone. The period for wet season
land preparation after harvest of the dry season rice crop is short and

25

L. Busetto et al.

Int J Appl  Earth Obs Geoinformation 75 (2019) 15–28

Fig. 10. Trends of MODIS estimated phenological metrics for the 2003–2016 period: crop establishment, ﬂowering and harvesting dates and total season length
(establishment to harvesting). Points represent the average dates estimated over the whole study area, plus/minus one standard error. Color and size of the point
depends on PhenoRice total detected rice area for each year and season.

characterized by shortage of labour and machinery. This leads to de-
layed harvest and land preparation. However, the wet season is cli-
matically bound by a cold period that starts in December and that may
lead to yield penalties if crops are harvested late. Therefore, rice
farmers opt for short-duration varieties for the wet season in order to
harvest as early as possible (with respect to rice maturity). To the au-
thors’ knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study of its kind that addresses

mapping, validating and analyzing multiannual trends in rice cultiva-
tion practices over a large area in the African continent. The compar-
ison with available rice area statistics and reported rice practices fur-
ther demonstrates the robustness of the PhenoRice algorithm for rice
crop monitoring in diﬀerent growing conditions. However, the main
innovative contribution of the study is the exploitation of long time
series of maps derived from remote sensing imagery for analyzing

26

L. Busetto et al.

Int J Appl  Earth Obs Geoinformation 75 (2019) 15–28

recent trends in rice cultivation practices over a large area. The results
highlight the great potential of this approach for characterizing and
monitoring multiannual trends. The study demonstrated that multi-
annual maps of parameters such as sowing/harvesting dates and crop
intensity might allow depicting variations in the characteristics of rice
production systems in Africa and across the world. Availability of this
kind of information is of great importance for evaluating the possible
impact of adverse events on rice production and – as a consequence – on
rice prices and food security [e.g. Boschetti et al., 2015]. Additionally,
it may be of help for improving modelling of yields and crop health
(e.g., Setiyono et al., 2018; Pagani et al., 2018) and better targeting
interventions to increase the productivity, sustainability and proﬁt-
ability of rice production (Boschetti et al., 2017).

In conclusion, our ﬁndings highlight

the usefulness of multi-
temporal remote sensing techniques in general, and of the PhenoRice
algorithm in particular, for providing insights about recent variations in
rice cultivation practices over large areas in developing countries,
where high-quality up to date information about changes in agricultural
practices are often lacking. A noteworthy limitation of the approach lies
in its reliance on coarse resolution satellite data, which leads to evident
underestimation of rice cultivated area. Although we state that this was
not a huge problem for the present study (which main objective was to
analyze recent trends in rice agro-practices rather than to obtain un-
biased estimates of rice area), it may hamper the usefulness of these
kind of techniques for other studies and applications. However, the
PhenoRice algorithm can be applied also to dense time series of deca-
metric optical images (such as those provided by integrating Sentinel 2
and Landsat-OLI data – Boschetti et al. (2018)): this permits monitoring
spatial–temporal changes in rice agro-practices with an unprecedented
accuracy and spatial resolution. Adaptation of PhenoRice to high spatial
resolution time series is indeed on-going, and will be object of future
research by the authors.

Acknowledgments

The research leading to these results was partially funded within the
ERMES FP7 project (http://www.ermes-fp7space.eu) which received
funding from the European Union Seventh Framework Program (FP7/
2007-2013) under grant agreement 606983. Sander Zwart acknowl-
edges the ﬁnancial support from the CGIAR Fund Council, Australia
(ACIAR), Irish Aid, European Union, International Fund for Agricultural
Development (IFAD), Netherlands, New Zealand, Switzerland, United
Kingdom, USAID and Thailand to the CGIAR Research Program on
Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security (CCAFS). The authors
are grateful to Mandiaye Diagne of the Africa Rice Center in Saint-
Louis, Senegal for sharing the crop establishment and harvesting dates
from the multi-year farm surveys. We also thank Pepijn van Oort and
Kazuki Saito of the Africa Rice Center for their valuable insights in the
interpretation of our ﬁndings. Finally, we thank the two anonymous
reviewers for their valuable suggestions for improving the quality of the
paper.

Appendix A. Supplementary Data

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the

online version, at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jag.2018.09.016.

References

Agnew, C., Woodhouse, P., 2010. Water resources and development. J. Agrarian Change

11, 598–600. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1471-0366.2011.00328.x.

Bivand, R.S., Pebesma, E., Gomez-Rubio, V., 2013. Applied Spatial Data Analysis with R,

2nd ed. Springer, NY. URL: http://www.asdar-book.org/.

Boschetti, L., Flasse, S., Brivio, P., 2004. Analysis of the conﬂict between omission and

commission in low spatial resolution dichotomic thematic products: the Pareto
boundary. Remote Sens. Environ. 91, 280–292. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2004.
02.015.

Boschetti, M., Busetto, L., Manfron, G., Laborte, A., Asilo, S., Pazhanivelan, S., Nelson, A.,
2017. PhenoRice: a method for automatic extraction of spatio-temporal information
on rice crops using satellite data time series. Remote Sens. Environ. 194, 347–365.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2017.03.029.

Boschetti, M., Busetto, L., Ranghetti, L., Haro, F.G., Campos-Taberner, M., Confalonieri,

R., 2018. Testing Multisensors time series on LAI estimates to monitor rice phe-
nology: preliminary results. Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE International Geoscience
and Remote Sensing Symposium (IGARSS).

Boschetti, M., Nelson, A., Nutini, F., Manfron, G., Busetto, L., Barbieri, M., Laborte, A.,
Raviz, J., Holecz, F., Mabalay, M.R.O., Bacong, A.P., Quilang, E.J.P., 2015. Rapid
assessment of crop status: an application of MODIS and SAR data to rice areas in
Leyte, Philippines aﬀected by Typhoon Haiyan. Remote Sens. 7, 6535–6557. https://
doi.org/10.3390/rs70606535.

Boschetti, M., Nutini, F., Manfron, G., Brivio, P.A., Nelson, A., 2014. Comparative analysis
of normalised diﬀerence spectral indices derived from MODIS for detecting surface
water in ﬂooded rice cropping systems. PLoS ONE 9, 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0088741.

Boschetti, M., Stroppiana, D., Brivio, P., Bocchi, S., 2009. Multi-year monitoring of rice
crop phenology through time series analysis of MODIS images. Int. J. Remote Sens.
30, 4643–4662. https://doi.org/10.1080/01431160802632249. Cited By 83.

Bouvet, A., Le Toan, T., Lam-Dao, N., 2009. Monitoring of the rice cropping system in the

Mekong Delta using ENVISAT/ASAR dual polarization data. IEEE Transactions on
Geoscience and Remote Sensing 47, 517–526. https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2008.
2007963.

Busetto, L., Ranghetti, L., 2016. MODIStsp: an R package for automatic preprocessing of

MODIS land products time series. Comput. Geosci. 97, 40–48. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.cageo.2016.08.020.

Busetto, L., Ranghetti, L., 2018. sprawl: spatial processing. R: Amorphous Wrapper

Library. r package version 0.3.0. URL: https://github.com/lbusett/sprawl.

Chumkesornkulkit, K., Kasetkasem, T., Rakwatin, P., Eiumnoh, A., Kumazawa, I.,

Buddhaboon, C., 2013. Estimated rice cultivation date using an extended Kalman
ﬁlter on MODIS NDVI time-series data. 2013 10th International Conference on
Electrical Engineering/Electronics, Computer, Telecommunications and Information
Technology 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1109/ECTICon.2013.6559573.

Clauss, K., Yan, H., Kuenzer, C., 2016. Mapping paddy rice in China in 2002, 2005, 2010

and 2014 with MODIS time series. Remote Sens. 8. https://doi.org/10.3390/
rs8050434.

de Mey, Y., Demont, M., Diagne, M., 2012. Estimating bird damage to rice in Africa:

evidence from the Senegal River Valley. J. Agric. Econ. 63, 175–200. https://doi.org/
10.1111/j.1477-9552.2011.00323.x.

Diagne, M., Demont, M., Seck, P.A., Diaw, A., 2013. Self-suﬃciency policy and irrigated

rice productivity in the Senegal River Valley. Food Security 5, 55–68. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s12571-012-0229-5.

Didan, K., 2015. MOD13Q1 MODIS/Terra Vegetation Indices 16-Day L3 Global 250m SIN

Grid V006 [Data set]. https://doi.org/10.5067/MODIS/MOD13Q1.006.

Dingkuhn, M., Sow, A., 1997. Potential yield of irrigated rice in African arid environ-

ments. In: Kropﬀ, M.J., Teng, P.S., Aggarwal, P.K., Bouma, J., Bouman, B.A.M., Jones,
J.W., van Laar, H.H. (Eds.), Applications of Systems Approaches at the Field Level.
Systems Approaches for Sustainable Agricultural Development. Springer Netherlands,
Dordrecht, pp. 79–99. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-017-0754-1_6.

Dong, J., Xiao, X., 2016. Evolution of regional to global paddy rice mapping methods: a
review. ISPRS J. Photogram. Remote Sens. 119, 214–227. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
isprsjprs.2016.05.010.

Dong, J., Xiao, X., Kou, W., Qin, Y., Zhang, G., Li, L., Jin, C., Zhou, Y., Wang, J., Biradar,

C., Liu, J., Moore, B., 2015. Tracking the dynamics of paddy rice planting area in
1986–2010 through time series Landsat images and phenology-based algorithms.
Remote Sens. Environ. 160, 99–113. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2015.01.004.

FAO, 2014. Production. Rice Market Monitor. URL: http://www.fao.org/3/a-i4147e.pdf.
FAO, IFAD, UNICEF, WFP, WHO, 2017. The state of food security and nutrition in the

world 2017. Building Resilience for Peace and Food Security. FAO, Rome. URL:
http://www.fao.org/3/a-I7695e.pdf.

Fischer, G., Nachtergaele, F., Prieler, S., Teixeira, E., That, G., van Velthuizen, H., et al.,
2013. Global Agro-ecological Zones (GAEZ) Version 3.0 [dataset]. URL: http://www.
fao.org/nr/gaez/about-data-portal/en/.

Gumma, M.K., Nelson, A., Thenkabail, P.S., Singh, A.N., 2011. Mapping rice areas of

South Asia using MODIS multitemporal data. J. Appl. Remote Sens. 5, 5–27. https://
doi.org/10.1117/1.3619838.

Gumma, M.K., Thenkabail, P.S., Maunahan, A., Islam, S., Nelson, A., 2014. Mapping

seasonal rice cropland extent and area in the high cropping intensity environment of
Bangladesh using MODIS 500m data for the year 2010. ISPRS J. Photogram. Remote
Sens. 91, 98–113. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2014.02.007.

Hijmans, R.J., 2017. raster: Geographic Data Analysis and Modeling. r package version

2.6-7. URL: https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=raster.

Huete, A., Justice, C., Liu, H., 1994. Development of vegetation and soil indices for

MODIS-EOS. Remote Sens. Environ. 49, 224–234. https://doi.org/10.1016/0034-
4257(94)90018-3.

Krush, G.S., 2005. What it will take to feed 5.0 billion rice consumers in 2030. Plant Mol.

Biol. 59, 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11103-005-2159-5.

Kurosu, T., Fujita, M., Chiba, K., 1997. The identiﬁcation of rice ﬁelds using multi-tem-
poral ERS-1 C band SAR data. Int. J. Remote Sens. 18, 2953–2965. https://doi.org/
10.1080/014311697217143.

Laborte, G., Gutierrez, M., B, J.G., Saito, K., Zwart, S.J., Boschetti, M., Murty, M., Villano,
L., Aunario, J., Reinke, R., Koo, J., Hijmans, R., Nelson, A., 2017. RiceAtlas a spatial
database of global rice calendars and production. Sci. Data 4. https://doi.org/10.
1038/sdata.2017.74.

Le Toan, T., Ribbes, F., Wang, L.F., Floury, N., Ding, K.H., Kong, J.A., Fujita, M., Kurosu,

27

L. Busetto et al.

Int J Appl  Earth Obs Geoinformation 75 (2019) 15–28

T., 1997. Rice crop mapping and monitoring using ERS-1 data based on experiment
and modeling results. IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. 35, 41–56. https://doi.org/
10.1109/36.551933.

paddy rice phenology using time series MODIS data over Jiangxi Province, China. Int.
J. Agric. Biol. Eng. 7, 28–36. URL: https://ijabe.org/index.php/ijabe/article/view/
1433.

Manfron, G., Crema, A., Boschetti, M., Confalonieri, R., 2012. Testing automatic proce-

Singh, R.P., Oza, S.R., Pandya, M.R., 2006. Observing long-term changes in rice phe-

dures to map rice area and detect phenological crop information exploiting time
series analysis of remote sensed MODIS data. SPIE 8531, Remote Sensing for
Agriculture, Ecosystems, and Hydrology XIV 85311E. https://doi.org/10.1117/12.
974662. (19 October 2012).

Nelson, A., Setiyono, T., Rala, A., Quicho, E., Raviz, J., Abonete, P., Maunahan, A., Garcia,
C., Bhatti, H., Villano, L., Thongbai, P., Holecz, F., Barbieri, M., Collivignarelli, F.,
Gatti, L., Quilang, E., Mabalay, M., Mabalot, P., Barroga, M., Bacong, A., Detoito, N.,
Berja, G., Varquez, F., Wahyunto, E., Kuntjoro, D., Murdiyati, S., Pazhanivelan, S.,
Kannan, P., Mary, P., Subramanian, E., 2014. Towards an operational SAR-based rice
monitoring system in Asia: examples from 13 demonstration sites across Asia in the
RIICE project. Remote Sens. 6, 10773–10812. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs61110773.
Nguyen, D.B., Clauss, K., Cao, S., Naeimi, V., Kuenzer, C., Wagner, W., 2015. Mapping

rice seasonality in the Mekong Delta with multi-year Envisat ASAR WSM data.
Remote Sens. 7, 15868–15893. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs71215808.

Nguyen, T.T.H., Bie, C.A.J.M.D., Amjad, A., Smaling, E.M.A., Chu, T.H., 2012. Mapping

the irrigated rice cropping patterns of the Mekong delta, Vietnam, through hyper-
temporal SPOT NDVI image analysis. Int. J. Remote Sens. 33, 415–434. https://doi.
org/10.1080/01431161.2010.532826.

van Oort, P., Balde, A., Diagne, M., Dingkuhn, M., Manneh, B., Muller, B., Sow, A., Stuerz,
S., 2016. Intensiﬁcation of an irrigated rice system in Senegal: crop rotations, climate
risks, sowing dates and varietal adaptation options. Eur. J. Agron. 80, 168–181.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2016.06.012.

Pagani, V., Guarneri, T., Busetto, L., Ranghetti, L., Boschetti, M., Movedi, E., Campos-
Taberner, M., Garcia-Haro, F.J., Katsantonis, D., Stavrakoudis, D., Ricciardelli, E.,
Romano, F., Holecz, F., Collivignarelli, F., Granell, C., Casteleyn, S., Confalonieri, R.,
2018. A high-resolution, integrated system for rice yield forecasting at district level.
Agric. Syst. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2018.05.007.

Pan, X.Z., Uchida, S., Liang, Y., Hirano, A., Sun, B., 2010. Discriminating diﬀerent landuse
types by using multitemporal NDXI in a rice planting area. Int. J. Remote Sens. 31,
585–596. https://doi.org/10.1080/01431160902894442.

Pebesma, E., 2018. sf: Simple Features for R. URL: https://CRAN.R-project.org/

package=sf ,r package version 0.6-3.

Peng, D., Huete, A.R., Huang, J., Wang, F., Sun, H., 2011. Detection and estimation of
mixed paddy rice cropping patterns with MODIS data. Int. J. Appl. Earth Observ.
Geoinform. 13, 13–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jag.2010.06.001.

Portmann, F.T., Siebert, S., Doll, P., 2010. MIRCA2000: global monthly irrigated and
rainfed crop areas around the year 2000: a new high-resolution data set for agri-
cultural and hydrological modeling. Global Biogeochem. Cycles 24. https://doi.org/
10.1029/2008GB003435.

R Core Team, 2018. A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R

Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. URL: https://www.R-project.
org/.

Ranghetti, L., Cardarelli, E., Boschetti, M., Busetto, L., Fasola, M., 2018. Assessment of
water management changes in the Italian rice paddies from 2000 to 2016 using sa-
tellite data: a contribution to agro-ecological studies. Remote Sens. 10https://doi.
org/10.3390/rs10030416.. URL: http://www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/10/3/416.

Saarnak, N.L., 2003. Flood recession agriculture in the Senegal River Valley. Geograﬁsk
Tidsskrift-Danish J. Geogr. 103, 99–113. https://doi.org/10.1080/00167223.2003.
10649483.

SAED/DDAC, 2015. Banque de donnees SAED. Saint Louis, Senegal. URL: http://www.

fao.org/nr/gaez/about-data-portal/en/.

Sakamoto, T., Phung, C.V., Kotera, A., Nguyen, K.D., Yokozawa, M., 2009. Analysis of

rapid expansion of inland aquaculture and triple rice-cropping areas in a coastal area
of the Vietnamese Mekong Delta using MODIS time-series imagery. Landsc. Urban
Plan. 92, 34–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.2009.02.002.

Sakamoto, T., Yokozawa, M., Toritani, H., Shibayama, M., Ishitsuka, N., Ohno, H., 2005.

A crop phenology detection method using time-series MODIS data. Remote Sens.
Environ. 96, 366–374. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2005.03.008. Cited By 441.
Seck, P.A., Tollens, E., Wopereis, M.C., Diagne, A., Bamba, I., 2010. Rising trends and

variability of rice prices: threats and opportunities for sub-Saharan Africa. Food
Policy 35, 403–411. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodpol.2010.05.003.

Segda, Z., Haefele, S., Wopereis, M., Sedogo, M., Guinko, S., 2005. Combining ﬁeld and
simulation studies to improve fertilizer recommendations for irrigated rice in Burkina
Faso. Agron. J. 97, 1429–1437. https://doi.org/10.2134/agronj2004.0275.

Senegalese Ministry of Agriculture, 2009. Programme National D’Autosuﬃsance en Riz –

Stratégie Nationale de Développement de la Riziculture. URL: http://www.
riceforafrica.net/downloads/NRDS/senegal_en.pdf.

Setiyono, T.D., Quicho, E.D., Gatti, L., Campos-Taberner, M., Busetto, L., Collivignarelli,
F., García-Haro, J., Boschetti, M., Khan, N.I., Holecz, F., 2018. Spatial rice yield es-
timation based on MODIS and Sentinel-1 SAR data and ORYZA crop growth model.
Remote Sens. 10. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs10020293.

Shihua, L., Jiangtao, X., Ping, N., Jing, Z., Hongshu, W., Jingxian, W., 2014. Monitoring

nology using NOAA-AVHRR and DMSP-SSM/I satellite sensor measurements in
Punjab, India. Curr. Sci. 91, 1217–1221. URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/
24094100.

Sun, H., Huang, J., Peng, A.H.D., Zhang, F., 2009. Mapping paddy rice with multi-date
moderate-resolution imaging spectroradiometer (MODIS) data in China. J. Zhejiang
Univ.: Sci. A 10, 1509–1522. https://doi.org/10.1631/jzus.A0820536.
Suwannachatkul, S., Kasetkasem, T., Chumkesornkulkit, K., Rakwatin, P.,

Chanwimaluang, T., Kumazawa, I., 2014. Rice cultivation and harvest date identiﬁ-
cation based on a hidden Markov model. 2014 11th International Conference on
Electrical Engineering/Electronics, Computer, Telecommunications and Information
Technology (ECTI-CON) 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1109/ECTICon.2014.6839856.

Tan, C., Koay, J., Lim, K., Ewe, H., Chuah, H., 2007. Classiﬁcation of multi-temporal SAR

images for rice crops using combined entropy decomposition and support vector
machine technique. Electromag. Res. 70, 19–39. https://doi.org/10.2528/
PIER07012903.

Tanaka, A., Diagne, M., Saito, K., 2015. Causes of yield stagnation in irrigated lowland
rice systems in the Senegal River Valley: application of dichotomous decision tree
analysis. Field Crops Res. 176, 99–107. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fcr.2015.02.020.

Tornos, L., Huesca, M., Dominguez, J.A., Moyano, M.C., Cicuendez, V., Recuero, L.,

Palacios-Orueta, A., 2015. Assessment of MODIS spectral indices for determining rice
paddy agricultural practices and hydroperiod. ISPRS J. Photogram. Remote Sens.
101, 110–124. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2014.12.006.

Turner, M.D., Congalton, R.G., 1998. Classiﬁcation of multi-temporal SPOT-XS satellite
data for mapping rice ﬁelds on a West African ﬂoodplain. Int. J. Remote Sens. 19,
21–41. https://doi.org/10.1080/014311698216404.

United Nations General Assembly, 2015. Transforming our world: the 2030 agenda for
sustainable development. In: Resolution Adopted at the 70th Session of the General
Assembly. 25 September. . URL: https://www.unfpa.org/resources/transforming-
our-world-2030-agenda-sustainable-development.

Wailes, E.J., Durand-Morat, A., Diagne, M., 2015. Regional and National Rice

Development Strategies for Food Security in West Africa. pp. 255–268. https://doi.
org/10.1108/S1574-871520150000015025. (Chapter 17).

Wester, P., During, A., Oorthuizen, J., 1995. Locally managed irrigation in the Senegal

River Valley in the aftermath of state disengagement. In: IWMI Research Reports
H016786. International Water Management Institute. . URL: https://ideas.repec.org/
p/iwt/rerpts/h016786.html.

Whitcraft, A.K., Becker-Reshef, I., Justice, C.O., 2015. A framework for deﬁning spatially
explicit Earth observation requirements for a global agricultural monitoring initiative
(GEOGLAM). Remote Sens. 7, 1461–1481. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs70201461.

Wickham, H., 2016. ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis. Springer-Verlag, New

York. URL: http://ggplot2.org.

Wu, W., Yang, P., Tang, H., Zhou, Q., Chen, Z., Shibasaki, R., 2010. Characterizing spatial
patterns of phenology in cropland of china based on remotely sensed data. Agric. Sci.
China 9, 101–112. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1671-2927(09)60073-0.

Xiao, X., Boles, S., Frolking, S., Li, C., Babu, J.Y., Salas, W., Moore, B., 2006. Mapping

paddy rice agriculture in South and Southeast Asia using multi-temporal MODIS
images. Remote Sens. Environ. 100, 95–113. https://doi.org/10.1016/830 j.rse.
2005.10.004.

Xiao, X., Boles, S., Frolking, S., Salas III, W., Li, B.M.C., He, L., Zhao, R., 2002.

Observation of ﬂooding and rice transplanting of paddy rice ﬁelds at the site to
landscape scales in China using VEGETATION sensor data. Int. J. Remote Sens. 23,
3009–3022. https://doi.org/10.1080/01431160110107734.

Xiao, X., Boles, S., Liu, J., Zhuang, D., Frolking, S., Li, C., Salas, W., Moore, B., 2005.

Mapping paddy rice agriculture in southern China using multi-temporal MODIS
images. Remote Sens. Environ. 95, 480–492. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2004.12.
009.

You, L., Wood, S., Wood-Sichra, U., Wu, W., 2014. Generating global crop distribution
maps: from census to grid. Agric. Syst. 127, 53–60. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.
2014.01.002.

Zhang, G., Xiao, X., Biradar, C.M., Dong, J., Qin, Y., Menarguez, M.A., Zhou, Y., Zhang, Y.,
Jin, C., Wang, J., Doughty, R.B., Ding, M., Moore, B., 2017. Spatiotemporal patterns
of paddy rice croplands in China and India from 2000 to 2015. Sci. Tot. Environ. 579,
82–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.10.223.

Zhang, G., Xiao, X., Dong, J., Kou, W., Jin, C., Qin, Y., Zhou, Y., Wang, J., Menarguez,

M.A., Biradar, C., 2015. Mapping paddy rice planting areas through time series
analysis of MODIS land surface temperature and vegetation index data. ISPRS J.
Photogram. Remote Sens. 106, 157–171. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2015.
05.011.

Zwart, S.J., 2017. A detailed map of irrigation infrastructure along the Senegal River by
2015. AfricaRice GIS Report – 4. Africa Rice Center, Cotonou, Benin. https://doi.org/
10.13140/RG.2.2.28009.49761.

28

