Expanding and intensifying rice production

consequences on agrobiodiversity management and diet
quality. A situated transdisciplinary gendered analysis

in Senegal Middle Valley River

Clavel Danièle, Eric Verger, Hélène Guetat-Bernard

To cite this version:
Clavel Danièle, Eric Verger, Hélène Guetat-Bernard. Expanding and intensifying rice production
consequences on agrobiodiversity management and diet quality. A situated transdisciplinary gendered
analysis in Senegal Middle Valley River. 2020. ￿hal-02949499￿

HAL Id: hal-02949499

https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-02949499

Preprint submitted on 25 Sep 2020

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

 

 

HAL, V1 
 
Expanding and intensifying rice production consequences on agrobiodiversity 
management and diet quality. A  situated transdisciplinary gendered analysis in Senegal 
Middle Valley River. 
Danièle Clavela,b, Eric O. Vergerc,  Hélène Guetat-Bernarde,f 
a CIRAD, UMR AGAP, Montpellier, 34398, France 
b AGAP, CIRAD, INRA, Montpellier SupAgro, Univ Montpellier, Montpellier, France 
e UMR LISST, Toulouse Jean-Jaurès University, Toulouse, France 

f UMIFRE 21 CNRS-MEAE, French Institute of Pondicherry, Pondicherry, India 

Corresponding author 
Danièle Clavel, daniele.clavel@cirad.fr 
 
Funding 
This research received the financial support of INRA-CIRAD GloFoodS Metaprogram “Transitions for 
a global food security”. 
 
Abstract 
After the extensive droughts of the mid70s in the Sahel, the construction of the Diama and Manantali 
dams materialized the will of the Senegalese State to develop the Senegal River Valley region. From 
2010 the government accelerated the pace to economically valorize these investments by 
implementing an ambitious national program of rice self-sufficiency. However, that rapid irrigated rice 
expansion added to the drought and pushed back the natural floods, endangering the traditional culture 
system of flood recession in the main riverbed, the Waalo. But the traditional flood recession cropping 
system is low in inputs: not as labour-intensive as rice (direct planting) and rich in biodiversity, in 
particular for sorghum. The DIVA project, was conducted in Guédé-Chantier and 2 surrounding 
villages (Podor Department) and was carried out within the Halpulaar society, the majority in the 
middle valley. It aimed to comprehensively describe the consequences of these transformations for the 
agricultural, social, gender and nutritional dimensions. Considering that the convergence of 
academically distinguished research objects could be better achieved by associating research with 
various actors involved in local life, thanks to the mediation of the NGO Enda Pronat local peoples, 
the experimentation in the reality of transdisciplinary was also a scientific objective of the study 
discussed in this paper. So we applied a gendered transdisciplinary approach to consider three 
interconnected dimensions: social and family logics, agricultural management of biodiversity and diet 
quality. Results show that women's initiatives to improve and diversify their diet in response to rice 
pressure, essentially consisted of organic or non-organic collective irrigated gardeners, established 
with the help of NGOs but without any technical or financial support from the public policies. 
Nevertheless, we assessed that the current diet quality of the women was of concern, with an 
overconsumption of cereals (white rice) to the detriment of other plant-based foods and animal 
products. Simulations of the dietary changes that have occurred over the past 45 years showed that the 
diet quality has deteriorated with a significant decrease of nutrient intakes such as thiamin, vitamins B-
6 and B-12, iron, potassium and zinc. We conclude that the rice intensification is increasing pressure 
on the flood recession system, which, by disappearing, increases food and environmental problems. 
Facing these deteriorations, the management of local agricultural biodiversity initiated by women is 
diverse and localized but limited and not so far supported by any governmental policy.  
 
Keywords:Transdisciplinary; Sustainability Science; Nutrition-Sensitive Agriculture; Gender 
analysis; Biodiversity Management; Diet quality. 

 

1 

 

 

 

 

Introduction  
Facing increasingly observed paradoxical situations showing disconnections between 
agricultural production and the different forms of malnutrition, especially in South Saharan 
Africa and Asia, a growing number of institutions around the world are committed to 
supporting nutrition-sensitive agriculture to achieve development goals. In a review about this 
topic, Ruel and Quisumbing (2018) identified six pathways through which agricultural 
intervention can impact nutrition and three of them relate to women: women's social status, 
health and workload. In another review, Carletto et al. (2017) recommend as a research 
priority, in particular for Africa, a better understanding of the transmission channels between 
crop choices, commercialization and nutritional outcomes through gendered approaches.  
In the present situation the research gaps found their causes in agricultural development 
policies shaped by postcolonial and neoliberal policies that have privileged certain groups and 
neglected other issues, in particular women in agriculture, conservation of agrobiodiversity 
(Ravera et al. 2016; Zimmerer and de Haan, 2019) and diversity of food habits (Raschke and 
Cheema, 2008; Guétat-Bernard and Ndami, 2019). Nevertheless, a gender lens is essential 
because peasant seed selection and food functions are connected with African gender social 
norms and division of labor which impact food practices and activities (Westholm and 
Ostwald, 2020). This invisibility and underestimation of the crucial role of rural women in the 
use and conservation of seeds was pointed out in particular by Patricia Howard (2003). This 
book documented extensively that the knowledge and use of plant biodiversity is gender-
differentiated everywhere. It defends the statement that gender perspective change our 
understanding of people-plant relationships in fundamental ways. In particular, when women 
select varieties for their fields or gardens, they consider not only agronomic characteristics, 
but also those related to processing, storage, consumption and the health needs of family 
members and domestic animals. 
The present study was based on the hypothesis, which is at the basis of the DIVA research 
project, that changes in diet are linked to agricultural changes, and proposed to support this 
hypothesis by connecting surveys involving a transdisciplinary approach (between 
biotechnical and social sciences: agronomy, genetics, nutrition, socio-anthropology) through a 
gender analysis. In order to carry out the study in a collaborative way (Pohl and Hirsch 
Adorn, 2008; Lang et al., 2012; Brandt et al., 2013; Wolff et al., 2019), various local 
stakeholders, outside academia, including the NGO Enda Pronat, the Senegalese Association 
of Farmers' Seeds (ASPSP), were solicited as well as the contribution of Senegalese scientists 
working regularly in this region, particularly with women.  
The study experimented with a transdisciplinary (TD) research as defined by Jaeger and 
Scheringer (1998) and Scholz and Steiner (2015): an approach in which the definition of the 
problem is independent of disciplinary considerations that are no longer able to cope with the 
increasing complexity of ‘real-world’ and contextualized problems. So, the originality and 
innovative nature of this project is threefold:  
1.  It was based on the definition of the research subject established in close collaboration 

with local NGOs, farmers’ organizations and the civil society; 

2.  It was linked to the deep nature of the academic TD effort implemented where the 
combination of social sciences and biotechnical science presented difficulties, both 
theoretical and practical;  

 

2 

 

 

3.  It was crossed by a gender analysis that is not only focused on gender relations in the 

family and community but also concerned technical agricultural observations on 
biodiversity management and nutritionals records.  

The primary aim of this article is to give a multidimensional and comprehensive (relational) 
view of the consequences of the recent evolution of agriculture in Middle Senegal Valley. The 
dimensions considered are the cultivated biodiversity, the female agricultural and culinary 
activities, gender relations within the family and the nutritional quality of family food. The 
second aim is methodological: as we consider the DIVA project as an experiment in TD 
research, we make a reflexive return to what is at stake in terms of conception of research, 
methods and results’ analyses. 
1 Methods  
Knowledge integration in TD processes starts with updating specific contextual information 
drawn from direct consultations with various people involved in the life of the locality. Based 
on the model developed by Scholz and Steiner (2015), this fine contextualization is connected 
with the investigation protocols and, therefore, not outside the study’s scope. 
Contextualization 
An agro-system historically built on the sorghum based flood recession agriculture  
The study was conducted in the middle valley of the Senegal River, district of Podor in the 
North of Senegal. More specifically, our study area was located in three neighboring villages 
(Guédé-Chantier, Guédé-Village and Lérabé) situated on a branch of the river, the Doué (Fig. 
1). 
Two major ecosystems make up the landscape: the Waalo, composed of rich, clayey soil near 
the river and depressions, and the Dieri, composed of sandy dune-type soil. The traditional 
mid valley halpulaar territory, called ‘Leydi’ (Fig. 2), is characterized by its geographical 
discontinuity and by movements of people and herds between the two areas (herds moving 
into the Waalo during the dry season for example). Floods structure the agricultural, pastoral 
and fishing activities; the recession cultivation in Waalo is imbricated with agro pastoralism 
in Dieri and with fishing activities in the river and semi permanent flood basins (Le Roy, 
2008; Cesaro et al., 2010; Garambois et al., 2018). The queen recession plant species is 
sorghum (Sorghum bicolor L.), locally called Samme. Sorghum is sown as soon as the 
recession basins - called Kolangal consisting of a rich hydromorphic soil (Hollaldé type) - 
have dried out enough for direct seeding, which allows rapid sowing of large areas. Further, in 
these excellent agro-ecological conditions, recession sorghum has economic, social and 
nutritional advantages because it has high cultural and nutritional value and does not require 
monetary loan inputs, ploughing or complicated tools and productivity is high (Le Roy, 2007, 
2008).  
An expansion and intensification of rice cultivation disrupting the equilibriums 
The agricultural system in the mid valley of Senegal River has undergone a major 
transformation since the climate crisis in the Sahel in the years 70-80s which has 
compromised hitherto durably rain fed crops and added uncertainties regarding traditional 
flood recession crops. In response, the Senegalese Government has since the 1950s 
strengthened the hydraulic installations (the Diama Dam downstream and the Manantali Dam 
upstream) in an attempt to develop irrigated crops (Seck, 1990). Hence, very visible 
transformations have taken place in the mid valley through the setting up of irrigated 
perimeters (locally called PIV), of which the Guédé-Chantier village is an emblematic place, 
that more and more transform the landscapes by replacing agro-pastoral and fishing systems, 
deeply anchored in a specific territory, by an intensive production system of irrigated 

 

3 

 

 

cultivation (90% rice). During the 1990s, dams allowed the tripling of the irrigated areas and 
rice production increased (Fig. S1 in Result S1 in Online Supplementary Material). The 
widespread use of irrigation and increased drought (rainfall is now stabilized at around max 
250 mm /year instead of around 300 mm on average before 1970) considerably reducing the 
natural flooding of the river and jeopardizing the traditional farming system. Most inputs were 
therefore based on synthetic fertilizers, with consequences both to the rate of soil organic 
matter and to the dependence of families on input purchases and borrowing (Garambois et al., 
2018). 
 As a result of rising cereal prices, the 2008 global food crisis has hit Sahel countries hard and 
a new wave of an intensive rice program, began in 2010, planned to accelerate the pace of the 
movement towards the country's rice self-security. This plan called Programme 
d'Accélération de la Cadence de l'Agriculture Sénégalaise (PRACAS) is the main agricultural 
element of the economic ‘Plan of Senegal Emergent’. The backbone of PRACAS consists in 
an extension of irrigated rice areas implemented by the national Société d'aménagement et 
d'exploitation des terres du Delta et du Fleuve Senegal (SAED) whose assignment by the 
State is essential since the State controls total irrigated land attribution which conditions the 
access to bank credit to buy seeds, inputs etc. for the rice cultivation campaign. This has led to 
such a great transformation in family life regarding food, health and social relations that most 
of those involved seriously question the ongoing situation.  
Nutritional context 
The inhabitants of the middle and lower valleys, which remained isolated rural areas until the 
end of 1990s, have since changed their food habits by eating more rice instead of local 
cereals. The World Food Program showed that food insecurity in the Podor department was of 
concern with only 65% of households considered as food secure while the national prevalence 
is 83% (WFP, 2017). In addition, it was shown that the diet in Northern Senegal is mainly 
composed of cereals, roots, vegetables oils and sugar and, to a lesser extent, vegetables, 
legumes and animal products (WFP, 2014). While this survey seems to indicate an 
unbalanced diet, accurate data about the food quantities consumed by the household and the 
individuals are lacking.  
Intersectionnality and social interaction of caste and gender 
The majority of the population belongs to the Halpulaar ethnic group hierarchized in castes 
which define the powers (religious or over land ownership) and craft activities in the 'Leydi’ 
(Fig. 2). For example, the situation of interdependence of traditional craft trades resulted in 
exchanges of sorghum, milk and fish at the end of the rainy season (Boutillier and Schmitz, 
1987; Boutillier, 1989). The system for allocating irrigated private land and the increase in 
(male) migration have had contradictory effects by favoring less strict caste hierarchies 
(Boutillier, 1989), and the maintenance of gender inequalities, in particular through the 
practice of virilocality (the spouses must settle in the place of residence of the husband’s 
parents). The virilocality is certainly all the more strategic (Feldmann, 2013) in a context of 
irrigated agriculture where the demand for labor is increasing (Cordell et al., 1996). Access to 
land is patrilineal and disproportionately favors men over women and high caste women over 
those at the bottom of the hierarchy (Sall and Thioune, 2012). This is particularly true for 
access to the most coveted land such as the Waalo and the Falo (on the river banks). Women's 
individual right to land not being recognized, they have, with the support of NGOs such as 
ENDA Pronat, recently negotiated access to shared gardens. But the land granted is often 
remote, not very fertile and not big enough to cover the needs and expectations of the women. 
Despite the heterogeneity of women's status according to their age, their entry into marriage 

 

4 

 

 

and their relationship to the head of the family, these gardens are often spaces of female 
solidarity. 
Study design 
Field research was conducted from April to June 2019 mainly by three female master students 
who lived and worked in the three villages jointly with three male Senegalese student-
facilitators and translators from the local community of Halpulaar. An experimental (non-
probabilistic) sample was established by local members of Enda Pronat to take advantage of 
their permanent presence in the area. This sample was constituted by nine families, three 
families in each village, involved in subsistence-oriented farming and with variations in 
socio-economic level and number of family members. Within these families, we have worked 
with 12 households (locally called foyré), considered as a set of people sharing the same meal. 
The foyré is also a socio-economic space of production and reproduction. This overlapping of 
status within the productive sphere and within the family explains the invisibility of women’s 
work, especially as regards irrigated rice cultivation where it is considered as marginal and 
qualified by the women themselves as ‘help’. Specific surveys related to three domains of 
research were jointly conducted on different members of the 12 households, as described in 
the following sections.  
Agricultural system and biodiversity survey 
All women and men from the 12 households were asked to provide information about the 
family functioning of agricultural systems, agricultural production and biodiversity 
management in semi-directive interviews. The individual interview guidelines were adapted 
to the respondent and the information collected took into account the differentiation between 
the fields cultivated by men and the areas cultivated by women. The interviews were analyzed 
in order to create a typology of farming areas and farmers' strategies (Rahmoun, 2018). In 
addition, a free listing method was used to obtain from women and men, from the 12 
households but asked individually, a list of cultivated and/or known plants, present or 
formerly present, in order to investigate the most important ones in more detail.  
Dietary survey and diet simulation 
Women usually responsible for food preparation for the household were asked to provide 
information about foods and beverages consumed by household members during the previous 
year using a semi-quantitative Food Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ) co-developed for this 
study with local members of Enda Pronat (Gueye, 2018). Matching with relevant food 
composition database, energy and 21 nutrients intakes by household members were estimated. 
Then the adult male equivalents (AME) method was used to calculate the AME-predicted 
food and nutrient intakes of the women (Weisell and Dop, 2012) and the AME-predicted 
nutrient adequacy of the diet was assessed calculating the percentage of women not respecting 
the international nutrient recommendation (Joint WHO/FAO Expert Consultation, 2004). The 
complete method is detailed in Method S1in Online Supplementary Material. Based on the 
main dietary changes identified through semi-directive interviews with men and women more 
than 65 years old from the 12 households about dietary changes that had occurred over the 
past 45 years, we simulated the effect of these changes by creating a simulated-past diet for 
each woman. SAS version 9.4 (SAS Institute) was used to perform the descriptive analyses of 
food and nutrient intakes and to conduct the simulations. 
Comprehensive approach to the interaction between garden, yard and kitchen 
To further understood the specific role of women in the local food system (agricultural 
production, biodiversity management, food preparation – ingredients and recipes – and 
sharing, food behavior), comprehensive and ‘conversational interviews’ (Olivier de Sardan, 

 

5 

 

 

1995) were conducted with all the women from the 12 households. The adoption of this socio-
anthropological and geographical posture had the particularity of creating a ‘listening 
situation’, where the interview as interaction took place at home, in the concessions or in the 
fields. Benefiting from a presence of three months in the area and previous stays in Senegal, 
one of the master student investigators who were making the social geography inquiry 
(Gardien, 2018) had the possibility of coming back and renewing the ‘conversational 
interviews’. This investigator, a young unmarried woman (who had been assigned a role 
related to this status), also used a participative observatory perspective related to specific 
responsibilities of women such as field and kitchen work (preparation of food, cleaning the 
yard or the dishes). This research posture had for its ambition to analyze words and gestures, 
and to take an interest in places (the kitchen, the yard, and the garden) and the way they 
condition speech. In addition, using the geographical approach of territorialities and the 
meaning of spaces given by the actors according to their social positions, some landscape 
readings were conducted during walks. 
Ways of working the transdisciplinary approach 
In addition to the specific surveys of agricultural production and biodiversity, diet and role of 
women in the local food system, peripheral interviews were realized simultaneously with a 
panel of 17 key informants about these different topics. This panel covered a large range of 
socioeconomic positions.  
Several formal meetings were organized in the study area in 2018 and 2019. An initial field 
meeting was held before the beginning of the study and involved 70 people (with Enda's 
employees, researcher from Africa Rice, teacher of the Eco-School of Guédé, responsible 
person from SAED, leader of women’s organizations, peasant organization members ASPSP, 
medical nurse and traditional nurse ‘badianogo’) to mobilize, explain and discuss the issues at 
stake in the area.  
Two workshops were then held during the supervising mission and involved the three student-
investigators, the three student-facilitators, some Senegalese scientists and some members of 
the DIVA team (French academic researchers and local members of Enda Pronat).  
Finally, a festive event called the ‘Diva Fest’ involving more than 75 people was held to share 
the results from the study with most of the women who were interviewed in the study, and 
collectively discuss these results. This event was also the opportunity to promote local 
biodiversity and culinary practices with collective meals. 
 
2 Results and discussion  
2.1 Multidimensional understanding of the consequences of the transformation of the 
agricultural system 
The new agro-system organization, family food strategies and gendered work   organization 
The two years of the study allowed us to observe the complex design of the agro-system in 
relation to food strategies (Fig. 3), with the recession culture being absent during the first year 
and present during the second. The agro-system was geared mainly towards cultivation of 
irrigated Nerica-type rice varieties (‘New Rice for Africa’ from Africa Rice) and many local 
actors have mentioned that prioritization of irrigated rice cultivation had disorganized the 
whole production system so none of the surveyed families cultivated rice in the warm dry 
season (harvest in July) despite SAED recommendations. Nerica comes from crosses between 
Oryza sativa (Asian rice) and Oryza glaberrima (African rice) but nutritionally they are 
varieties of ‘white rice’ improved only to be productive under irrigation. The productive logic 

 

6 

 

 

in the system of the valley is to limit risks, first and foremost the risk of food shortage 
especially during the lean season. Another cash and food crop in the production system is the 
local purple variety of onion called ‘Violet de Galmi’. Onion was sold in a structured value 
chain, which generally helped to maintain a satisfactory selling price, and constituted the most 
regularly valuable agricultural production. According to families that can produce in the 
Waalo, the capacity to produce onions (with a surplus from 2 to 15 tons according to the 
family) seemed decisive for building a cash inflow allowing for buying food and achieving 
food self-sufficiency in the absence of a recession culture. The last dominant crop in the 
production system was the Roma non-local variety of tomato, entirely given over to 
processing by the Société de Conserves Alimentaires au Sénégal, in Ross-Bethio (Senegal 
River delta). 
As mentioned earlier, the productive logic in the system of the valley was, always intended to 
be, oriented mainly toward limiting risks to primarily achieving food self-sufficiency all 
through the year. The lean period is a constant preoccupation for women. The participatory 
survey revealed that in the Waalo rice enters into land competition with the traditional flood-
based organization and that this poses a real problem for families because of the attachment to 
traditional systems for technical, economic, food and cultural reasons, as other authors have 
found (Le Roy, 2007; Bruckmann, 2018). As typically in small family farming, the 
diversification of sources of income and food production is the main strategy of the families. 
The recession cultivation of sorghum fulfilled this function perfectly because it cost much less 
to grow (requiring less work and no inputs) and provided more money than rice that is sold by 
the kilo for twice the price. Nevertheless, such a strategy faced several limitations. Aiming for 
food security much more than for the achievement of good rice yields placed the families at 
odds with the demand of the public authorities transmitted by SAED which relates only to the 
objectives in terms of irrigated area and annual production: the rice production is expected to 
increase from 455,000 tons in 2018 to 875,000 tons in 2020. As a consequence of this 
mismatch between local and national objectives, families cannot but deplore the lack of 
technical and financial support from public authorities for the carrying out of diversification 
activities. Another important limitation was the land constraint, especially because the Waalo 
lands prone to flood recession culture are never sold if not occupied by rice, tomato or onion 
(Bruckmann, 2018). According to the perception of being food secure, defined by families as 
being able to achieve self-sufficiency in rice and having extra assets from off-farm activities 
or expatriates, different strategies of production and limitations were described (Table 1).  
While there were different strategies of diversification, a clear gendered organization of 
agricultural work was observed (Table 2). Globally, in irrigated plots of the Waalo, under the 
responsibility of the men, almost exclusively owners of the land, the women were carrying 
out different strategic tasks (transplanting, weeding, guarding the cultivation against birds, 
harvesting) for the production of rice, onions and tomatoes. The new agro-system 
organization has created a novel female status, that of the ‘woman who helps’, which means 
she loses all family and social recognition. Even when migration kept young men absent and 
women were involved in many tasks, they very rarely gained recognition with strategic bodies 
(Top, 2014). When the lack of manpower made it necessary to make choices between crops in 
the irrigated Waalo or flood basins, the family choice gave priority to irrigated plots and rice 
that became strategic for the families’ food security and for earning money. The Waalo has 
thus lost its place as a feeding ground to irrigated areas, and to rice, which is now the staple 
food of the peasants. Sorghum, on the other hand, was becoming a cash crop for some 
families, who preferred to sell it when they grew it because: ‘The 50 kg bag is worth 30,000 
FCFA for sorghum against 15,000 FCFA for rice. The women sell and the profits go to the 
husband but are shared in the family in the form of food’. 

 

7 

 

 

By contrast, specific women (such as the wife of the head of the household after negotiation 
and agreement with the land owners of the noble caste (Lawokobé) were responsible for all 
the agricultural activities in the Falo (along the riverbanks), for six months of the year. The 
men, at their request, came to their aid. The products from the riverbanks could be used to 
enhance sauces and accompany dishes such as cowpea. Corn was eaten roasted, especially by 
children; sweet potatoes, grown on the lowest part of the banks, could be found in lunch 
dishes, served as a vegetable, as can squash or cherry tomato. The Falo has been gradually 
abandoned in favor of collective gardens; its cultivation was also more difficult due to the 
lack of flooding. In the Dieri, the involvement tended to be somewhat more balanced in the 
sense that both men and women worked in this area but on separate activities: men were more 
involved in tillage, plowing and weeding while women were more involved in harvesting. 
This pattern was slightly different depending on whether millet or colocynth and cowpea were 
cultivated (Table 2). Finally, there were specific areas in irrigated Waalo recently gained by 
women for shared gardens dedicated to highly diversified productions such as hot pepper, 
cowpea, squash, cherry tomato, sorrel, eggplant, beetroot, onion, salad, cabbage and okra. 
Invariably, women were solely responsible for food processing whatever the cultivation and 
the area where the cultivation came from (Fig. S2 in Result S1 in Online Supplementary 
Material). 
Knowledge on biodiversity and breeding in their agro-ecological context 
While the cultivation of recession sorghum, cowpeas and corns has declined in favor of 
cultivation of irrigated Nerica-type rice varieties, this did not seem to have consequences for 
the knowledge of biodiversity or the breeding of traditional species varieties. Having such 
perennial knowledge was in sharp contrast to Nerica-type rice varieties, which were 
associated to no specific knowledge and generally known by the name ‘Nerica’ followed by a 
serial number.  
When focusing on recession sorghum growing in the Waloo, women listed up to 19 varieties 
whereas only 5 of them were still cultivated. The other varieties are still available locally, 
preserved by some families and sold in the bush markets; they are still present, too, in 
culinary memories. The women were able to accurately describe the characteristics of the 
grain and flour, the related agricultural practices (e.g. crop cycle, seasonality), the interests 
and disadvantages of cultivating the variety, and the management of seeds. This was 
explained by the fact that seed management and breeding were traditionally the responsibility 
of women. All these varieties were local or peasant. A summarized description of the 8 most 
cited recession sorghum varieties and photographs can be found in Tables S1 and Fig. S3 in 
Result S1 in Online Supplementary Material. Briefly, the 3 most frequently cited varieties 
were Poordi (which means brown, the color of the seed), Mariam Sowdou (from the name of 
the woman who introduced and spread it) and Balieri (which means white). Yellow variety 
(Paaca) was also mentioned. The choice of cultivating one or another variety was guided by 
the length of the crop cycle (e.g. the Poordi cycle was 20 days shorter than the Balieri cycle) 
and bird attacks (e.g. the Balieri was less sensitive compared to Poordi). As a result, the 
Poordi variety was the most cultivated while its bitter taste (a protective factor against bird 
attacks) was less and less appreciated by the families. Among the 19 other varieties 
mentioned, the cultivation of most of them has been abandoned due to longer cycles (e.g. 
Bobo jamm and Samba Souké). In addition, the decrease in flooding for several consecutive 
years has had consequences for the seed conservation of these different varieties. Because the 
maximum storage time is two years according to women involved in sorghum breeding, and 
because of the uncertainty of the next floods, women progressively stopped keeping seeds and 
preferred to buy them at the market or from neighbors. Nevertheless, some women did their 
best to save sorghum seeds. 

 

8 

 

 

In addition to the recession sorghum or cowpea cultivation in the Waalo, there was 
traditionally a large biodiversity of edible species allowing families to feed themselves during 
the year. Women listed varieties of squash and pumpkin (called Déné Boudé) with yellow 
flesh (called Diayédjé), maize, cornilla (called niébé), and black rice (called Sarna or Maro 
Balléo, which was cultivated before the Nerica rice), wild grasses with small edible seeds 
(known locally as Pagguri, locally considered similar to fonio), fruit of the water lily, seeds of 
Nymphea lotus (called locally Ndayri), or bulb of Gladiolus sp. (Iridaceae locally called 
Dayeedji). However, the consumption of the previously mentioned species has decreased 
although some of them are still much appreciated foods, especially for their seeds (called 
Podé); they are available in the market. One woman explained: ‘The disappearing crops 
means that people stop eating these foods. Because if you don't grow them anymore, you have 
to buy them, so you don't prefer to buy them, because before you could get them for free, 
apart from the trouble of growing them’. Podé was one of the plants and associated dishes 
constantly evoked and considered as a culinary loss while it was alive in people’s memories. 
Cooking it is always a celebration: the choice to live in the villages, and sometimes in the 
concessions, made it possible to ask the families to cook the podé for us. This was an 
opportunity to measure the emotion involved in making this dish. Wild bush fruits such as 
jujub (desert date palm (Balanites aegyptica)) and Fulani ngigili (Boscia Senegalensis) have 
also become rare. The Kelly (Zizyphus Mauritania), a bush fruit resembling the jujub has 
completely disappeared (according to fieldwork, see also Boëtsch et al., 2012). 
Consequences of the new organization of the local agro-system on women’s diet 
Another consequence of the new organization of the local agro-system concerns the quality of 
the diet of the families, and notably of the women. Data collected through the FFQ in 12 
households were used to calculate AME-predicted food and the nutrient intake,over the 
previous year, of 43 women aged from 18 to 65 years. The current diet, described in Table 3, 
was mainly based on cereals, rice intake representing 61% of the total intake of cereals: wheat 
18%, maize 8%, sorghum 8% and mil 5%. It also included modest intakes of fruits, 
vegetables and legumes mainly produced by the women in the shared gardens and the Falo 
(only 35% of the women followed the advice of consuming 400 g/d of fruits, vegetables and 
legumes (Joint WHO/FAO Expert Consultation, 2002) and very low intakes of animal 
products.  
While the average energy intake of 2791 kcal/d might be relatively adequate as compared 
with the average energy requirement for women with active lifestyles, the current global 
nutrient adequacy of the diet was of concern (Table 4). Due to the predominance of refined 
cereals in the diet, more than half the women were unable to respect the recommendation of 
eleven nutrients, and a large portion of the sample did not meet the recommendation of two-
thirds for iron (62.8%), vitamin A (55.8%), vitamin B-12 (48.8%), folate (46.5%), and 
riboflavin (39.5%) indicating a risk of nutrient inadequacies.  
Based on interviews with adults older than 65 years, four main dietary changes that have 
occurred over the past 45 years were identified and we simulated the effect of these changes 
by creating a simulated-past diet for each women where i) the consumption of meat was 
raised to 20 g per day; ii) the current consumption of fish was multiplied by ten; iii) the 
current consumption of legumes was multiplied by two; iv) the associated increase of energy 
intake was compensated for by the decrease of consumption of cereals; and v) among the 
consumption of cereals, the consumption of rice and wheat was replaced by a caloric 
equivalent consumption of sorghum and mil. As a result, the simulated-past diet, richer in 
meat and fish, was found to be associated with higher average intake of most of the nutrients 
and a reduction of the prevalence of women not respecting the nutrient recommendation 

 

9 

 

 

(especially for thiamin, vitamins B-6 and B-12, iron, potassium and zinc). Nevertheless, this 
diet cannot be qualified as healthy due to a low consumption of fruits and vegetables.  
While our estimations of both current and simulated-past diet might be prone to errors and 
bias, interviews with local actors about our results and comparison with literature about 
current and past diet in Sub-Saharan Africa indicated that our results were not too strongly 
affected by these errors and biases (see Method S1 in Online Supplementary Material for a 
more detailed discussion). Another question that arose in our work regarding diet has to be 
mentioned. While the kitchen space was clearly described by local women as a food space in 
continuity with the agricultural space where the sovereignty of women was exercised and 
where they expressed and improved a whole series of knowledge dishes (Fig. S4 in Result S1 
in Online Supplementary Material), it would be desirable to continue investigations into the 
links between dishes and associated plants, all the more so since these are subjects that arouse 
great interest among women. We initiated this approach by starting with certain emblematic, 
such as preparations based on cowpeas or sorghum coucous (niri) whose consumption has 
fallen sharply due to lower production and higher purchase costs. Different preparations are 
associated with niri: niri Kosam (with milk), niri bouna (with dried fish) or niri beref. There 
are emblematic dishes, still prepared for certain occasions such as baptisms and weddings and 
associated with good health and culinary heritage. This study confirms, notably following 
Howard (2003), that culinary traditions are a major element in the preservation of wild and 
cultivated biodiversity. If culinary traditions are diminishing, the reasons for conserving these 
plants useful for food, as well as the knowledge associated with them (cultivation, processing, 
and storage) are also being lost. Thus, the work of women in the transmission of culinary 
knowledge is of great importance, and this makes the kitchen the primary place for 
maintaining biodiversity. In addition to being a place for conserving plants, the kitchen is also 
a place for creating emotions and memories. Thus, to evoke food and its evolution is also to 
evoke the memories associated with it by appealing to the senses.  
2.2. The DIVA project as an experiment in transdisciplinary research  
In this part, we stressed a reflexive return to the DIVA experiment of TD research. The study 
made it possible to confront academic research with a complex object and to observe certain 
difficulties and limitations in the reality but also the advantages that the TD approach 
presents. Firstly, complete interdisciplinarity, aiming for a combination of natural and social 
sciences, is inherently problematic both in its choice of objects and in its methods: the 
sciences of biology and health are governed by metrics and very delimited objects whereas 
the objects of socio-anthropology are not measured and the analysis of gender is by definition 
transverse. Secondly, the TD process, the participation of civil society in knowledge genesis, 
confronts the motives and values of people (ethics) which are generally different depending 
on the point of view. If the scientist is interested in producing knowledge that is as 
generalizable as possible, local actors are motivated by the desire for change or the resolution 
of a problem. 
Theoretical foundation of our posture in TD and Sustainability Science 
A research posture consisting in using all available resources (i.e. any form of knowledge and 
any way of accessing knowledge) does not represent a break with that which precedes it 
(tending always towards more specialization and technical progress) but an evolution linked 
to the profusion of knowledge and the improvement of access to all kinds of knowledge. In 
this respect, pragmatic philosophy, a philosophical theory of education developed by John 
Dewey (Dewey, 1925 [2012]; 2005) at the beginning of 20th century in the United States 
offers a particularly relevant framework to reflect on knowledge management for action 
science . In his theory of experience and education Dewey postulates that all knowledge 

 

10 

 

 

derives from experience and that new theories become established by and during empirical 
experiments. These concepts are at the basis of the sustainability science dealing with 
‘wicked’ or real-world problems (Lang et al., 2012; Wolff et al., 2019). The theoretical 
framework of Sustainability Science is nowadays certainly of growing interest in the approach 
to societal demand in the face of the multifaceted environmental crisis that requires designing 
research processes in a flexible way in order not to be blinded by too focalized objectives 
(Brandt et al., 2013). The Sustainabilty approach draws on concepts of research, such as eco-
feminism (Mies and Shiva 1993; Guétat-Bernard, 2020), the French school of contemporary 
pragmatic sociology that provides important insights into the bounded multiplicity of nature's 
worth in political modernity (Latour 2005; Thevenot, 2007; Boltanski, 2009), political 
ecology for food sovereignty in the South and gender justice (Bezner-Kerr et al., 2018; 2019). 
So, our approach has been situated accordingly and the fine contextualization was part of that. 
With the DIVA case study, considered as an empirical experiment bringing into play different 
types of knowledge, we attempted to collect information from diversified sources and to 
recombine results into a more global answer to the global question emerging from the 
consultations with local actors, men and women, about what is a more sustainable local food 
system. Based on this expectation, we emphasize how important it is to implement and share 
a ‘comprehensive’ understanding of the context in the broad sense (historical, political, 
geographic, spatiotemporal and cultural). Mutual understanding is only achievable if 
conditions that led to the observed situation are known to all and in that respect mediation 
organized by local members of Enda Pronat was instrumental. 
Added value and limitations of the transdisciplinary research experiment 
Our main finding concerning context was that cultural agricultural and ecological contexts 
were interlinked even if this interlinking was less visible today than ‘before rice’. In this 
regard, Berkes and Folke (1998), Folke et al (2003) and Hölling (2001) described coupled 
social–ecological systems as co-evolved, with mutually dependent and interacting social and 
ecological components. Understanding these interactions in our study was key to deciphering 
the status and positions of actors and investigating their embedded knowledge. For example, 
the ‘DIVA Fest,’ which was a festive event held to present the results, was one of several 
opportunities to interact with the community. All the participants (75 people, including most 
of the women who were interviewed in the study) continued to provide information enriching 
our own survey. During this event, women further described and discussed their attempts to 
experiment with a new cultural association of sorghum and cowpea under irrigation. They 
also took advantage of the event to report the death of seedling plants due to warmer and 
polluted water. The women farmers also appreciated the synthesis of the researchers' results: 
they felt that they were understood (the study correctly reflected their point of view), that their 
knowledge was valued and that their difficulties were publicly expressed in a symbolic place 
like the town hall.  
While the dietary survey made it possible to describe the current diet of women as unbalanced 
in terms of a share of the different food groups and rice overconsumption, the TD approach 
allowed to go further when linking diet to local environment. This approach validated the 
intuition of local actors that the traditional dietary pattern based on sorghum and mil 
consumption was healthier than the current one. Furthermore, cross exchanges with actors 
allowed us to pose a strong hypothesis of the negative effect of the gradual disappearance of 
the recession system on transhumant pastoralism in the Waalo. It was confirmed that this 
disappearance also affected fishing activities practiced in basins flooded during the recession 
and activities to maintain these basins for the reproduction of fishes, as anticipated by 
Boutillier and Schmitz (1987). 

 

11 

 

 

Another added value of the TD approach was observed when studying the local biodiversity 
through gendered interviews. Without information and feedback from local actors about our 
methods (i.e. design and revision of interview guide and ‘improvised’ women focus groups in 
the agro ecological planting places, kitchens, etc.), it would have been difficult to collect so 
precise a description of the varieties of plants like sorghum and cowpea, or the knowledge on 
the variety diversity of these plants. 
 
3 Conclusion  
The first goal of our research was, following Pohl and Hirsch Adorn (2008), to enlighten and 
promote what is perceived to be the common good by the actors, which relates to the value 
system shared by the Senegal Middle River people. To insure a correct instruction of the 
multi-dimensional inquiry considering the limited resources, the diverse participants in the 
DIVA study have endeavored to multiply interactions and mediation to primarily establish 
links of confidence, to be able to reliably put into perspective the case-specific knowledge 
gained. So the clear political outcome of our study was that the vision of irrigated rice 
cultivation, initially designed to ‘valorize’ the Senegal Middle River valley potential, operated 
a ‘flood marginalization’ far from the vision of all local actors, whether male or female. In 
this regard, pollution and food problems have already been anticipated for almost 20 years by 
a committee of researchers and local actors in this area (Adams, 2000; Bruckmann, 2018). 
However, the public authorities and donors have not taken these warnings into account by 
adopting an economic development approach where the river is disconnected from its flood 
and ignoring food traditions, cultural and agri-food function of floods. Our results, deeply 
locally situated, show the growing negative impacts on the expansion of irrigated intensive 
rice cultivation on biodiversity, traditional knowledge and nutrition. The ethical dimension of 
the TD and gendered DIVA study, despite its geographical limitations, consisted in giving 
value to the heritage and memory of local actors in their quest for food and cultural 
sovereignty. Women farmers of diverse status have expressed this attachment while at the 
same time stressing their concern for the disappearance of cultural, agriculture and food 
habits.  
 
References 
Adams, A (2000) Social Impacts of an African dam: equity and distributional issues in the 

Senegal River Valley. World Commission on Dams contributing paper prepared for 
Thematic Review 1: Social Impacts of Large Dams Equity and Distributional Issues. 
World Commission on Dams, Cape Town. 

Berkes, F and Folke, C (1998) Linking social and ecological systems for resilience and 

sustainability. In: Berkes F and Folke C (eds.), Linking Social and Ecological Systems: 
Management Practices and Social Mechanisms for Building Resilience. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge:1-26.  

Bezner Kerr R, Nyantakyi- Frimpong H, Dakishoni L, Lupafya E, Shumba L, Luginaah I, 

Snapp SS (2018) Knowledge politics in participatory climate change adaptation research 
on agroecology in Malawi. Renewable Agriculture and Food Systems 33:238–251. 

Bezner Kerr, R, Hickey, C, Lupafya, E, Dakishoni, L (2019). Repairing rifts or reproducing 

inequalities? Agroecology, food sovereignty, and gender justice in Malawi. The Journal of 
Peasant Studies: 1-20.  

Boëtsch, G, Guerci, A, Gueye, L, Guisse, A (eds.) (2012) Les plantes du Sahel, usages et 

enjeux sociaux. CNRS Editions, Paris.  

 

12 

 

 

Boltanski, L (2009) De la critique. Précis de sociologie de l’émancipation, Gallimard, Paris. 
Boutillier, JL (1989) Irrigation et problématique foncière dans la vallée du Sénégal. Cahiers 

des Sciences Humaines 25:469-488. 

Boutillier, JL and Schmitz, J (1987) Gestion traditionnelle des terres (système de décrue/ 

système pluvial) et transition vers l’irrigation. Le cas de la vallée du Sénégal. Cahiers des 
Sciences Humaines 23:533-554. 

Brandt, P, Ernst, A, Gralla, F, Luederitz, C, Lang, DJ, Newig, J, Reinert, F, Abson, DJ, von 

Wehrden H (2013) A review of transdisciplinary research in sustainability science. 
Ecological Economics 92:1-15. 

Bruckmann, L (2018) Crue et développement rural dans la vallée du Sénégal : entre 
marginalisation et résilience. Belgeo 2. doi: https://doi.org/10.4000/belgeo.23158 

Carletto, C, Corral, P and Guelfi, A (2017) Agricultural commercialization and nutrition 
revisited: Empirical evidence from three African countries. Food Policies 67:108-118. 
Cesaro, JD, Magrin, G and Ninot, O (2010) Atlas de l’élevage au Sénégal. Commerce et 

territoires. PRODIG, Paris. 

Cordell, DD, Gregory, JW and Piche, V (1996) Hoe and Wage: A Social History of a Circular 

Migration System in West Africa.Westview Press, Colorado. 

Dewey, J (1925 [2012]) Experience et Nature traduced by Joelle Zask, Gallimard, Paris. 
Dewey, J. (2005) La réalité comme expérience, trad. Saint-Germier P. and Truc J. in Tracés. 
Revue de Sciences Humaines, n°9. « Expérimenter », Paris, ENS éditions, texte en ligne 
sur http.//traces.revues.org 

Feldmann, N (2013) Division sexuelle du travail et mobilités géographiques féminines. 

Géocarrefour 88, 97-106.  

Folke, C, Colding, J and Berkes, F (2003) Synthesis: building resilience and adaptive capacity 

in social–ecological systems. In: Berkes F, Colding J and Folke C (eds.), Navigating 
Social–Ecological Systems: Building Resilience for Complexity and Change. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge : 352-387. 

Garambois, N, El Ouaamari, S, Fert, M, Radzik, L (2018) Politique hydro-agricole et 

résilience de l’agriculture familiale. Le cas du Delta du fleuve Sénégal. Revue 
internationale des études du développement 4:109-135. 

Gardien C (2018) Evolution des pratiques agricoles et des comportements alimentaires, 
stratégies et inventivités des femmes. En milieu rural Halpulaar, Moyenne Vallée de 
Fleuve Sénégal » Master 2 en socio-anthropologie “Gestion des Territoires et 
Développement Local-Territoires Ruraux” (Université de Toulouse Jean Jaurès), Toulouse. 

 Guétat-Bernard, H (2020) Ecoféminisme. In: Dictionnaire Critique de l'Anthropocène. 

CNRS édition, Paris. 

Guétat-Bernard, H and Ndami, C (2019) Géohistoire du genre et du développement rural en 

Afrique. L’exemple emblématique des régions de l’ouest et du sud du Cameroun. 
In:Charmain, L and Martinez, A (eds.), Genre, féminismes et développement : une trilogie 
en construction. University of Ottawa Press, Ottawa, pp. 347-364. 

Gueye D (2018) Evaluation des effets d’un changement de système productif sur la qualité 

nutritionnelle de l’alimentation. Test d’une méthode d’enquêtes et de simulation 
alimentaires dans la moyenne vallée du fleuve Sénégal. Master 2 en nutrition, spécialité 
«Nutrition humaine et santé », Université de Bordeaux, Bordeaux.  

Hölling, CS (2001) Understanding the Complexity of Economic, Ecological, and Social 
Systems. Ecosystems, 4: 390-405. 
Howard, P (ed.) (2003) Women and Plants. Gender relations in biodiversity management and 

conservation. Zed Books, London and New York. 

 

13 

 

 

Jaeger, J and Scheringer, M (1998) The Structure of Transdisciplinary Research – Six Case 
Studies (Poster). Available at http://www.env-science.ethz.ch/JaegerScheringer_TD.pdf 
(Accessed 28 April March 2020). 

Joint WHO/FAO Expert Consultation (2002) Diet, Nutrition and the Prevention of Chronic 

Diseases. WHO, Geneva. 

Joint WHO/FAO Expert Consultation (2004) Vitamin and mineral requirements in human 

nutrition. WHO, Geneva. 

Lang, DJ, Wiek, A, Bergmann, M, Stauffacher, M, Martens, P, Moll, P, Swilling, M, Thomas, 

CJ (2012) Transdisciplinary research in sustainability science: practice, principles, and 
challenges. Sustainability Science 7:25–43. 

Latour, B (2005) Rassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor-Network-Theory. Oxford 

University Press, Oxford. 

Le Roy, X (2008) Le sorgho de décrue dans la vallée du Sénégal. In: Mollard E and Walter A 

(eds.), Agricultures singulières. IRD Editions, Paris, pp. 33-38. 

Le Roy, X. 2007. Le sorgho de décrue dans la vallée du Sénégal. http://hal.ird.fr/ird-

00179486 

Mies M and Shiva Vandana (1993). Ecofeminism. London & Atlantic Highlands, Zed Books. 

London and New York. 

Olivier de Sardan, JP (1995) La politique du terrain. Enquête 1, 71-109. 

https://doi.org/10.4000/enquete.263 

Pohl, C and Hirsch Hadorn, G (2008) Methodological challenges of transdisciplinary 

research. Natures Sciences Sociétés 16:111-121. 

Rahmoun T, 2018.  Etude de l’évolution de l’agrobiodiversité et son impact sur l’alimentation 

dans une région d’intensification agricole, la moyenne Vallée du Fleuve Sénégal 
(Commune de Guédé). Master 2 en agronomie, spécialité « De l’agriculture à 
l’agroécologie », AgroParisTech/Agreenium, Paris.  

Raschke, V and Cheema, B (2008) Colonisation, the New World Order, and the eradication of 

traditional food habits in East Africa: historical perspective on the nutrition transition. 
Public Health Nutrition 11: 662-674. 

Ravera, F, Martin-Lopez, B, Pascual, U, Drucker, A (2016) The diversity of gendered 
adaptation strategies to climate change of Indian farmers: A feminist intersectional 
approach. Ambio, 45, S335-S351. 

Ruel, MT, Quisumbing, AR and Balagamwala, M (2018) Nutrition-sensitive agriculture: 

What have we learned so far? Global Food Security 17:128-153. 

Sall, FD and Thioune, R (2012) Sénégal : les femmes rurales à l’épreuve d’une citoyenneté 

foncière. Groupe d'Etudes et de Recherches Genre et Sociétés. Dakar. 

Scholz WR, Steiner G. (2015) The real type and ideal type of transdisciplinarity processes: 

Part II-What constraints and obstacles do we meet in practice? Sustainability Science, 
10:527-544. DOI: 10.1007/s11625-015-0327-3 

Seck, SM (1990) Management and organisation of irrigation on peasant farmer holdings in 

the Senegal valley. Revue de géographie de Lyon 65:38-45. 

Thevenot, L (2007) The Plurality of cognitive formats and engagements. European Journal of 

Social Theory 10:409-423. 

Top, A (2014) Evolution des systèmes de production agricole dans un contexte de 

changement climatique et de migration, et effet de genre, dans les trois zones eco-
géographiques de la région de Matam au Sénégal, Thèse de sociologie de l’Université de 
de Saint Louis et l’Université de Toulouse (Dr H. Guetat –Bernard), Saint Louis. 

Weisell, R and Dop, MC (2012) The adult male equivalent concept and its application to 

Household Consumption and Expenditures Surveys (HCES). Food Nutrition Bulletin 33, 
S157-S162. 

 

14 

 

 

Westholm, L and Ostwald, M (2020) Food production and gender relations in multifunctional 

landscapes: a literature review. Agroforestry System 94:359–374. 

Wolff, MG, Cockburn, JJ, De Wet, C, Bezerra, JC, Weaver, MJT, Finca, A, De Vos, A, 

Ralekhetla, MM, Libala, N, Mkabile, QB, Odume, ON, Palmer, CG (2019) Exploring and 
expanding transdisciplinary research for sustainable and just natural resource management. 
Ecology and Society 24:14. doi: https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-11077-240414 

World Food Program (2014) Analyse Globale de la Vulnérabilité, de la Sécurité Alimentaire 

et de la Nutrition (AGVSAN).World Food Program, Rome. 

World Food Program (2017) Revue Stratégique Nationale pour l'Eradication totale de la Faim 

(ODD 2) au Sénégal. World Food Program, Rome. 

Zimmerer, KS and De Haan, S (eds.) (2019) Agrobiodiversity. Integrating Knowledge for a 

Sustainable Future. MIT Press, Cambridge.

 

15 

 

 

Tables and Figures
Table 1. Farming strategies according to the level of self-sufficiency in rice  

Self-sufficiency in 
rice 
Families achieving 
self-sufficiency in 
rice (≥5 ares of 
rice and/or ≤ 20 
persons in the 
family) with extra 
asset 

Families not 
achieving self-
sufficiency in rice 
(large families 
with ≤5 ares of 
rice) and without 
extra asset  
 

Objective 

Barriers 

Strategy 

Generate 
income and 
maintain food 
security 

Achieve food 
security 

- All parcels are 
not exploitable 
under irrigation 
- Due to their 
family value, 
Waalo parcels are 
never sold  

- Plot of limited 
size 
- No possibility 
for financing for 
diversification 
projects 

- Combination of irrigated 
culture and Waalo culture 
- Money from emigration or 
extra-agricultural activity 
invested 
- Increase size of tomato plots  

- Income from cash crops for 
financing rice season 
- Combination of irrigated 
culture / Waalo culture / Dieri 
culture 
- Sale of goats and sheep 
(women)  
- Female gardening perimeters 
(for consumption and sale) 
- Sale of sorghum (if any) to buy 
rice (women and man) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

16 

 

 

Table 2. Division of agricultural activities between men and women by agricultural 
ecosystem.  
 

Waalo 

Falo 

Dieri 

Millet 
cultivation 

Other 
cultivationsa 

Women  Man  Women  Man  Women  Man  Women  Man 

Agricultural 
activities 

Tillage, plowing 

- 

++++  +++ 

Sowing 

Weeding 

Guarding 
(against birds)b 
Harvesting 

Threshing/ 
Winnowing 
Processing 

++ 

+ 

++ 

++++ 

++++  +++ 

+++ 

+ 

 

+ 

+ 

++++  ++++ 

++++  ++++ 

++++ 

- 

++++ 

+ 

- 

+ 

 

- 

- 

- 

+ 

++ 

++ 

++++ 

++++ 

++++ 

++++ 

+++ 

+ 

+++ 

++ 

+++ 

++ 

+++ 

+ 

+ 

+ 

- 

+ 

 

++++ 

 

++++ 

+++ 

 

+ 

 

- 

Share agricultural activities between men and women: “-” means 0%; “+” means 0 to 20%; 
“++” means 20 to 50%; “+++” means 50 to 80% and “++++” means 80 to 100 %. a Other 
cultivation in the Dieri were cowpea and colocynth. b Guarding against birds was also made 
by children (on a cycle of 90 days, they performed this work the last 50 days). 
 
 
 

 

 

17 

 

 

Table 3. AME-predicted food intake in grams and contribution to the total intake of solid 
foods in women from observed and simulated-past diet. 

 

Observed diet 

Simulated-past diet 

Food group 

Mean  SD 

% of the total 
 intake of  
solid foods 

Mean  SD 

% of the total 
intake of  
solid foods 

 
 
 

707 
Cereals 
189 
Vegetables 
63 
Fruits 
34 
Tubers 
94 
Legumes 
4 
Meat 
13 
Fish 
75 
Dairy 
Oils 
66 
Sugar and sugar products  89 
19 
Miscellaneous 
Beverages 
178 

178  52.3 
54 
14.0 
4.6 
33 
2.5 
15 
60 
7.0 
0.3 
7 
10 
0.9 
5.5 
55 
4.9 
31 
27 
6.6 
1.4 
7 
50 
0 

460 
189 
63 
34 
189 
20 
126 
75 
66 
89 
19 
178 

177  34.6 
54 
14.2 
4.7 
33 
15 
2.6 
120  14.2 
1.5 
0 
98 
9.5 
5.6 
55 
4.9 
31 
27 
6.7 
1.4 
7 
50 
0 

 

18 

 

 

Table 4. AME-predicted energy and nutrient intake in women from observed and simulated-
past diet, and percentage of women not respecting the nutrient recommendation. 
 

 

 

Observed diet 

Simulated-past diet 

Nutrient 

Energy (kcal) 

Protein (g) 

Protein (% EI) 

Total fat (g) 

Total fat (% EI) 

Available carbohydrates (g) 

 

Available carbohydrates (% EI)  55-75 

Fiber (g) 

Vitamin A (µg) 

Vitamin E (mg) 

Thiamin (mg) 

Riboflavin (mg) 

Niacin (mg) 

Folate (µg) 

Vitamin B-6 (mg) 

Vitamin B-12 (µg) 

Vitamin C (mg) 

Calcium (mg) 

Iron (mg) 

Magnesium (mg) 

Phosphorus (mg) 

Potassium (mg) 

Sodium (mg) 

Zinc (mg) 

Copper (mg) 

30 

500 

7.5 

1.1 

1.1 

16 

400 

1.3 

2.4 

45 

750 

29.4a 

220 

750 

3510 

2000 

9.8a 

1.5 

Not  

respecting  

reference 

 (%) 

 

 

Reference 
value 

Mean  SD 

2791 

400 

 

 

10-15 

 

15-30 

63.8 

9.13 

102 

32.8 

400 

57.5 

28.4 

308 

20.5 

1.08 

0.97 

22.1 

265 

1.25 

1.78 

66.1 

667 

16.4 

550 

1184 

3423 

14.3 

1.49 

46.5 

27 

6.3 

64 

5.9 

 

44.2 

 

18.6 

10.1 

46.5 

122 

5.3 

100 

0 

0.33 

46.5 

0.35 

62.8 

7.4 

70 

11.6 

72.1 

0.43 

53.5 

0.67 

86.0 

24.9 

23.3 

242 

5.7 

212 

351 

990 

62.8 

88.4 

0 

4.7 

67.4 

5523 

2333  100 

8.58 

1.68 

2.18 

69.8 

0.50 

23.3 

Mean 

SD 

2791 

400 

100 

14.4 

122 

39.3 

318 

45.5 

38.9 

324 

24.0 

1.46 

1.14 

34.7 

329 

2.69 

11.5 

66.1 

776 

27.2 

938 

1830 

4574 

5055 

12.7 

2.28 

20 

2.9 

30 

6.9 

60 

8.5 

9.0 

123 

6.3 

0.37 

0.34 

7.77 

106 

0.71 

7.4 

24.9 

234 

6.0 

224 

304 

866 

2287 

2.3 

0.54 

Not 
respecting  

reference 
(%) 

 

 

51.2 

 

86.0 

 

79.1 

20.9 

93.0 

0 

7.0 

62.8 

0 

72.1 

0 

0 

23.3 

62.8 

4.7 

0 

0 

11.6 

93.0 

0 

0 

EI, Energy intake; a Because the simulated-past diet contains more animal products, the recommendations for iron 
and zinc were selected with a moderate dietary bioavailability, resulting in a recommendation of 19.6 mg/d and 
4.9 mg/d, respectively. In the simulation, the replacement of rice and wheat by the consumption of sorghum and 
mil explained 100% of the increase of fiber intake, 52% of the increase of thiamin intake, 38% of the increase of 
vitamin B-6 intake, 75% of the increase of iron intake, 55% of the increase of magnesium intake, 50% of the 
increase of phosphorus intake and 33% of the increase of potassium intake. 
 
 

 

19 

 

 

 
 
 
 

Fig. 1. Location map of the studies villages (Guédé-Chantier, Guédé-village and Lérabé) 
situated in the middle valley of the Senegal River, district of Podor in the North of Senegal.  
 

 

 

 

20 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2. Schematic representation of the 'Leydi', a traditional terroir characterized by its 
geographical discontinuity. Adapted from Boutillier and Schmitz (1987).

 

21 

 

 

Fig. 3. Annual organization of agricultural production and food availability (case of single crop rice and the possibility to plant recession 
sorghum).  

 

 

22 

