Agric Hum Values (2010) 27:163–176
DOI 10.1007/s10460-009-9207-8

Understanding women’s participation in irrigated agriculture:
a case study from Senegal

Marcia L. Nation

Accepted: 13 November 2008 / Published online: 10 April 2009
Ó Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2009

Abstract As climate change in West Africa poses pro-
found limitations on rainfed agriculture, policymakers and
practitioners may again turn to irrigated agriculture to pro-
vide food for a growing population. Gendered analyses of
irrigation projects reveal that in many cases women’s par-
ticipation in irrigated agriculture has been limited due to a
lack of access to land and water. Past research in the Upper
Valley of the Senegal River suggests that variables other than
access to land and water condition women’s participation in
irrigated agriculture. Fully understanding women’s partici-
pation in irrigated agriculture demands examination of intra-
household dynamics and livelihood strategies as well as the
impacts of agricultural commodiﬁcation.
Keywords Gender  Irrigation  Rice  Senegal 
Senegal River Valley

Introduction

Many irrigation projects have been deemed failures by
gender and development professionals because the projects
have failed to include women as beneﬁciaries, despite their
involvement in agricultural production, and others that have
included women have failed to address their particular
needs as farmers. Numerous instances of these failures have
been documented from the Gambia (Carney 1988, 1998;
Dey 1981, 1982), Sri Lanka (Athukorala 1996), Nigeria
(Jackson 1985); Kenya (Chambers and Moris 1973),
Burkina Faso (Conti 1979), Bangladesh (White 1992),

M. L. Nation (&)
Global Institute of Sustainability, Arizona State University,
P.O. Box 875402, Tempe, AZ 85287-5402, USA
e-mail: marcia.nation@asu.edu

Indonesia (MacPhail 1993; Jha 2004), Peru (Lynch 1997),
and India (Ramamurthy 1991). Given these results, gender
training manuals have used irrigation projects as examples
to highlight the need for gender analysis during the project
cycle (Palmer 1985; Jackson 1985; Rao et al. 1991).

Work on gender and irrigation development has under-
scored the problems women face in gaining access to and
control over productive resources, such as irrigation land
and water (Carney 1988, 1998; Delgado and Zwarteveen
2007; van Koppen 1998; Zwarteveen 1995, 1997). Argu-
ments for women gaining more equitable access to these
resources are grounded in critiques of the unitary house-
hold model where an altruistic male head of household
allocates resources equally among household members and
where these members pool incomes and share preferences.
Numerous studies have demonstrated that the intra-house-
hold allocation of resources is in fact dependent upon
bargaining among household members with differential
bargaining power, not on a benevolent head of household
(Agarwal 1997a). In particular, research in sub-Saharan
Africa has challenged the idea that men and women have
similar priorities for resource use. In areas of female
farming systems, limiting women’s access to productive
agricultural resources not only marks a shift in gender
relations but also profoundly impacts family subsistence.
Agarwal (1997b, p. 1379) suggests that putting ‘‘resources
in women’s hands could promote not only gender justice
but also improve family welfare and efﬁciency.’’

Yet access to productive resources is only one factor that
inﬂuences women’s participation in irrigated agriculture.
O’Laughlin (2007, p. 21) argues that
interventions for
allocating more productive resources to women are per-
petuating the myth that poverty would be reduced if
women controlled a greater share of land, labor, agricul-
tural inputs, and credit. Instead, she calls attention to the

123

164

Fig. 1 The Senegal River
Valley. Source: Lericollais and
Diallo (1980)

Atlantic
Ocean

l R .

a

g

e

S e n

Lampsar R.

St. Louis

DELTA

L. de Rkiz

Dagana

S e n e gal R.

DoueR.

R .

l

o

g

r

G o

L. de Guiers

LOWER
VALLEY

Matam

MIDDLE VALLEY

n

e

g
al

S

e

R.

0

50

100 km

N

M. L. Nation

Gande

Bakel

UPPER
VALLEY

F aleme

‘‘broad structural and contested processes of individuali-
zation and commodiﬁcation of productive resources in
rural Africa’’ as well as the need to examine gender rela-
tions, both conﬂictive and cooperative, across the range of
activities within the household in order to understand
gendered poverty (O’Laughlin 2007, pp. 40–41). Jackson
(1998) notes that women’s agency—the choices they make
and actions they take—may be as important to under-
standing women’s participation in irrigated agriculture as
male-dominated social structures that exclude women from
accessing land and water. In sum, irrigation planners at the
state or community levels cannot assume that granting
women access to land and water on irrigation projects will
automatically result in women participating on an equitable
basis with men. To provide a better understanding of the
relationship between structure and agency, Crow and Sul-
tana (2002, p. 714) call for research that spans the divide
between domestic and economic spheres.

in

Using a case study and data from the Upper Valley of
the Senegal River in eastern Senegal (Fig. 1), this article
explores the factors that inﬂuenced women’s participation
in irrigated agriculture. In this region, women had access to
irrigation land and water, though not necessarily on an
equal basis with men. I argue that it is necessary to go
beyond the irrigation ‘‘perimeter’’—the area with irrigation
infrastructure—to examine the multiple roles women
played in agricultural and domestic production in order to
more fully explain the factors that inﬂuenced women’s
participation
agriculture. Understanding
women’s participation in irrigated agriculture demands an
examination of intra-household dynamics and livelihood
strategies as well as the political, economic, social, and
natural environments in which the household is embedded.
This paper draws on ﬁeldwork undertaken in 1990 and
other data from the same time period. At that time, there
was a conﬂuence of stressors on traditional agricultural
systems in the area. The region was in the midst of a multi-
decadal drought (Magistro and Lo 2001; Nicholson 2001;
Ojo et al. 2004), which impacted agricultural strategies and
made remittances from male migration even more neces-
sary than usual to make up for shortfalls in production

irrigated

123

(Weigel 1982; Manchuelle 1989). Irrigation development
was well underway in the Upper Valley, although the
distribution of inputs and credit by the state to support this
development was being altered through structural adjust-
ment policies in the agricultural sector. Impacts associated
with the commodiﬁcation of agriculture, mainly vis-a`-vis
irrigation development, were beginning to be felt, and
changes to land tenure were altering traditional patterns of
access to land. All of this was set in the larger context of
river basin development in the Senegal River Valley, which
was supposed to enhance the irrigation potential of this
drought-prone region, among other aims.1 The ﬁeldwork
was conducted before the upstream Manantali Dam (on the
Baﬁng River, a major tributary of the Senegal) had become
fully operational, but farmers were aware of its potential
impacts on ﬂoodplain agriculture. This was also a time
when traditional class and caste relations were being
changed and challenged, although this research does not
focus on these changes speciﬁcally.2

This case study takes place during a convergence of
economic, social, environmental, climatic, and policy chan-
ges in the Senegal River Valley. A number of these changes
pivoted on irrigated agriculture, making this a particularly
important period of time for examining gender relations in

1 Irrigation development in the Senegal River Valley was part of a
larger river basin development scheme that includes two dams: the
Manantali Dam along the Baﬁng River (a major tributary of the
Senegal) in Mali and the Diama Dam (a salt-intrusion dam) on the
Senegal River in the Lower Valley. The Manantali Dam is a multi-
purpose dam to improve navigation, generate hydroelectric power, and
increase the amount of water for irrigation. To achieve these goals, the
river’s regime must be altered, decreasing the annual ﬂooding
downstream. Farmers practicing ﬂood recession agriculture depend
on this ﬂooding. Thus, river basin development was predicated on the
view that ﬂood recession agriculture would diminish accordingly and
be replaced by irrigation, which would be enhanced by releases of
water from the dam’s reservoir during the dry season. .
2 During this time, people were particularly reluctant to discuss class
and caste relations as these were changing in the Valley and were, in
some cases, painful reminders of the past. As a result, I chose not to
focus on these in interviews and consequently excluded these from
much of my data analysis.

Understanding women’s participation in irrigated agriculture

165

irrigation. This allows us to analyze women’s participation in
irrigated agriculture at a juncture when agricultural planners
were promoting irrigation as a solution to shortfalls in tra-
ditional agricultural production and when irrigated agricul-
ture was moving from an orientation toward the household
and local marketplace to the regional market. This historical
moment helps us understand the complexity of gender rela-
tions in agricultural systems experiencing change and illu-
minates the multiple challenges and contradictions inherent
in policies directed at
increasing women’s agricultural
production.

Researchers of human-environment systems (Haberl
et al. 2006; Costanza et al. 2007) have underlined the
importance of examining the near and distant past at var-
ious scales in order to fashion more effective policies. The
Sahelian drought of the 1970s, for instance, has been re-
examined in order to assess potential impacts of future
droughts (Batterbury and Warren 2001). Margins of semi-
arid and arid areas in Africa will be at risk to declines in the
amount of land suitable for agriculture,
the length of
growing seasons, and crop yields due to climate change
(IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) 2007,
p. 8). Given this scenario, it seems highly likely that there
will be a renewed push for irrigated agriculture in Sahelian
Africa, despite the problems faced by existing projects
(Uhlir 2003; Vandersypen et al. 2006; Venema et al. 1997).
The development of new, lowland irrigated rice varieties
through crossing Asian and African rice varieties will give
impetus to this push (Somado et al. 2008). This case study
of irrigation development during a period of prolonged
drought with multiple economic, social, and political
stressors (O’Brien et al. 2004) gives a glimpse into how
agricultural systems behaved under conditions of stress and
change and how women farmers, whose production was
essential for household subsistence, were able to cope with
these changes. Women are typically a vulnerable group
during times of drought (Eriksen et al. 2005), and under-
standing their responses, coping strategies, and adaptive
capacities is essential for the development of agricultural
policies, particularly in areas where women are active
agricultural producers.

I collected data for this research through surveys of
married, divorced, or widowed women in 30 randomly
selected households in a village of 1554 people on the
Senegal River close to the juncture of the Senegalese,
Malian, and Mauritanian borders. I randomly selected two
women from each household for the two-stage survey. Since
some households had only one woman present during the six
month ﬁeld study, this reduced the sample size to 56 women.
The initial survey contained open- and closed-ended ques-
tions and was targeted at gathering basic data at
the
household level as well as details about women’s agricul-
tural and household activities. The second survey included

more in-depth and open-ended questions stemming from
issues that had surfaced when analyzing data from the ﬁrst
survey. These surveys were complemented by key infor-
mant interviews with various actors and stakeholders in
irrigation and river basin development, in-depth interviews
of women and men in selected households using a semi-
structured survey, and group interviews with the Groupe-
ment des femmes, the women’s irrigation group. Other data
on irrigation development in the Upper Valley came from
the Land Tenure Center (University of Wisconsin), the
Socie´te´ d’Ame´nagement et d’Exploitation des Terres du
Delta et des les Valle´es du Se´ne´gal et de la Fale´me´ (SAED),
the Africa Rice Center,
the United States Agency for
International Development (USAID), and other sources and
were used as a means of contextualizing the village study.

Background

The Senegal River Valley has been the focus of irrigation
development efforts since 1947, though this development
only began in the upper portion of the Valley (referred to in
this paper as the ‘‘Upper Valley,’’ Fig. 1) in 1976. While the
state irrigation agency, SAED, and its predecessors had
initiated irrigation development in much of the Senegal
River Valley, a returned migrant from France introduced
pump irrigation on small plots of land to villages in the Upper
Valley. The struggles of the local farmers organization, the
Fe´de´ration de Paysans Organise´s en Zone Soninke´ (the
Federation of Soninke´ Farmers of the Bakel Area), to retain
autonomy from SAED have been well documented by
Adams (1979, 1985) and Adams and So (1996). By the late
1970s, the Federation had made some concessions to SAED,
but it has continued as an important support and advocacy
organization for its member irrigation groups, supplying
them with inputs, technical assistance, and training. Mean-
while, SAED had its functions altered in the late 1980s by
structural adjustment policies that sought to limit state
involvement in the agricultural sector and to promote private
investment. Irrigation development remained an important
instrument of Senegalese agricultural policy and a means
toward national food self-sufﬁciency.

One ethnic group, the Soninke´, dominates in villages
along the Senegal River in the Upper Valley. Until the
introduction of pump irrigation, farmers in these villages
cultivated by rainfed and ﬂood recession techniques. Rainfed
agriculture during the months of June–October supplied
staple grains (millet, sorghum, and maize), legumes, and
vegetables. Flood recession crops—sweet potatoes, African
eggplant,
tomatoes, sorghum, maize, and millet—were
cultivated during the winter months from November to
February. Rice, not an important crop before irrigation, was
grown during the rainy season in ﬂooded depressions inland.

123

166

Fig. 2 The topography of the
Upper Valley. Source:
Euroconsult/RIN (1990, p. 8)

FONDE
Dryland
cultivation
and irrigation

FALO
Flood
recession
cultivation

FONDE
Dryland
cultivation
and irrigation

M. L. Nation

JEERI
Dryland
cultivation

WALO
Flood
recession
cultivation
and irrigation

Height of water
during dry season

As in many West African societies, there was and con-
tinues to be a gender division of labor in producing these
crops. Peanuts are women’s major rainfed crop and an
important contribution to a diet that is otherwise protein
poor. In the village that is the case study for this research, all
married women and widows who are capable of ﬁeldwork,
regardless of caste or class, are allocated parcels for peanut
cultivation in the jeeri (Fig. 2) by the village chief. Aside
from assistance with clearing and establishing new ﬁelds,
women cannot call on the labor of adult males from the ka
(household or extended family). During harvest time, they
can mobilize boys’ (either unmarried sons or other young
household males) labor to transport the peanuts back to the
compound. For day-to-day work on the peanut ﬁelds,
women rely on their own labor and that of their unmarried
daughters and daughters-in-law. They retain considerable
control over their peanut harvest and may sell or barter
production in excess of the household’s needs.

Men and boys in the ka cultivate rainfed grains for the
household’s granaries under the direction of the kagumme
or head of household on household ﬁelds (te khore). Males
also may also cultivate individual parcels once their daily
work responsibilities on the te khore have been fulﬁlled.
Women provide assistance to husbands and household
males during harvest-time, receiving grain in return, and
are responsible for all grain processing. Men give all of
their grain harvest, except what they have cultivated on
their individual parcels, to the kagumme.

During the rainy season, many women cultivate millet
and maize on small plots of land near the village, although
their harvests tend to be small. Women also have cultivated
a ﬂoating variety of African rice (Oryza glaberrima) in
inland depressions (walo) that are ﬂooded during the rainy
season. This rice, also called ‘‘red rice’’ because of its
reddish tinge when hulled, is low yielding and difﬁcult to
process without ﬁrst parboiling.

Flood recession production presents a challenge to a
simple notion of the gender division of labor. Access to

123

HOLLALDE

FAUX

HOLLALDE

land is a critical variable determining who cultivates the
seasonally inundated fertile land on the river banks, called
falo land, and the depressions away from the river bank,
walo land. Under the customary land tenure system in the
Upper Valley, households of the noble class typically
control and cultivate these valuable lands as te khore, and
few women have access to individual plots. Since ﬂood
recession land is very productive, the noble households that
control this land rarely rent it to individuals, although
households with ancestral ties to noble households may be
granted access to this land. Farmers plant the falo with
vegetables and maize while using the walo for sorghum,
maize and millet production.

Irrigation: changing the nature of agricultural
production

Pump irrigation represented a departure in many ways from
traditional rainfed and ﬂood recession agriculture, the gender
implications of which will be detailed in the next section.
When village irrigation ﬁelds (also known as perimeters)
were originally constructed in the Upper Valley, male heads
of household and married women, regardless of class or
caste, were permitted to join the village irrigation group and
were given land on the perimeter. This was signiﬁcant in two
respects. Previously, males from certain noble households
had controlled the land with high production potential (ﬂood
recession falo and walo land). Now, all households had
equitable access to such land on the village irrigation ﬁelds.
Furthermore, married women (and in some villages, wid-
owed and divorced women), who had little access to ﬂood
recession land, could obtain individual parcels in the irri-
gated ﬁelds to cultivate as own-account farmers.

While the distribution of irrigation land attempted to be
equitable, irrigation introduced a more intensive capitali-
zation of agriculture. As one woman noted, ‘‘Now you need
money to cultivate.’’ In the past, major capital expenditures

Understanding women’s participation in irrigated agriculture

167

in agriculture had been limited to the purchase of hand tools
(often crafted by local artisans) and payment of occasional
laborers (mainly on household ﬁelds). Under irrigation,
membership in the village irrigation group and access to
land depended on the payment of fees to cover the cost of
diesel fuel and oil for the irrigation pump, the amortization
on the pump, and the pump operator’s wages. Since
chemical fertilizer was needed to maintain fertility on irri-
gated ﬁelds, farmers allocated money for this expenditure.
For farmers accustomed to either maintaining fertility
through a bush-fallow system, as in the case of women’s
peanut production, or through annual ﬂooding and animal
grazing on ﬁeld stubble, as on men’s grain ﬁelds, the pur-
chase of chemical fertilizer represented a new demand on
cash resources. Some irrigation groups paid tractor owners
to plow their grain ﬁelds before each planting season, and
group members absorbed this expense as well.

in the Upper Valley,

Not surprisingly, the capitalization of agriculture under
irrigation was accompanied by increased commodiﬁcation
of agriculture.
Irrigation was originally introduced to
increase local food production in a region that suffers from
periodic food shortages. Accordingly, early efforts at irri-
gation focused on improving the yields of traditional veg-
etable and grain types through water control. While rice
was not important in local diets before irrigation, mounting
rice imports to feed urban and rural populations in western
Senegal had prompted schemes for increasing national
production. When SAED assumed control over irrigation
development
the agency heavily
promoted Asian rice (Oryza sativa) as an irrigated, rainy
season crop to support the Senegalese government’s import
substitution policies. In doing so, SAED established a
monopoly over producer rice sales and a marketing system
for rice. Asian rice grew to dominate grain production in
irrigated ﬁelds and became an important grain in local
diets, replacing traditional grains as the starch base for
noonday meals. The commodiﬁcation of irrigation pro-
duction extended to dry season vegetable production as
well. Some male farmers perceived potential proﬁts in
cultivating ‘‘European’’ vegetables for the regional market.
New crops and irrigation technology required farmers to
techniques of farming. Among the new
learn different
agricultural tasks were fertilizer application, leveling and
watering of ﬁelds and maintenance of irrigation canals.
These tasks contributed to the labor intensity of irrigated
agriculture. Agricultural extension replaced indigenous
knowledge as a means of transferring knowledge about
crop production. With SAED’s assumption of control over
irrigation in the Upper Valley came greater state oversight
in agricultural production. Village irrigation groups were
chastised for using ‘‘incorrect’’ cultivation techniques
or for not maintaining their
irrigation ﬁelds properly
whereas the state had interfered little with traditional

agriculture.3 Over time, irrigation groups began to change
in some villages, as will be detailed in the following
section.

Women’s ability to accommodate these changes inﬂu-
enced their participation in irrigated agriculture. Using
results from a village case study in the Upper Valley and
other data, the next sections will delve deeper into the
gendered impacts of irrigation and will discuss key factors
that have inﬂuenced women’s participation in irrigation:
access to land, access to and returns from capital, labor
allocation to irrigated agriculture, and control over irriga-
tion technology.

Land: equal membership but unequal access?

Unlike on other irrigation schemes documented (Dey 1982;
Conti 1979; Jackson 1985; Zwarteveen 1997), women have
not been totally excluded from land distribution on the
village irrigation lands. In 1990, women comprised roughly
47% of irrigation group membership in the Upper Valley.
But despite attempts at equal access to land, women cul-
tivated far less land than men—only an estimated 25–30%
of irrigation land.4

A major reason for this differential in land under male
and female cultivation was the changing nature of irriga-
tion group membership and objectives. Early village irri-
gation development was based on the principle of open and
equal membership regardless of class, caste, and gender,
and sought to ameliorate food security conditions in the
Upper Valley. By the early 1980s, groups began to estab-
lish irrigated ﬁelds with more restrictive access, such as
those limited to any male heads of household in the village.
These allowed men to acquire more land for household
cultivation since parcel sizes on village irrigation lands
were often quite small (many under 1,500 square meters).
These male irrigation groups cultivated land as te khore
with capital, labor, and returns from irrigation controlled
by the kagumme or household head. Adherents of Muslim
sects and marabouts also constructed irrigation infrastruc-
ture, and these irrigation groups, due to religious dictates,
excluded female membership.

In the mid-1980s, the trend in new irrigation develop-
ment was toward even more restrictive membership in the
form of private irrigation groups. Membership in private
groups was limited to family members or political allies

(2006) cites a similar

situation with regard to the

3 Harris
Southeastern Anatolia Project in Turkey.
4 I calculated women’s irrigation group membership in 1990 from
ﬁgures provided in SAED’s Database of Bakel Delegation PIVs. In a
few cases, the only membership ﬁgures available were from Blijdorp
(1987). I used both of the above sources and information in USAID
(1990) to estimate the amount of land women cultivated.

123

168

M. L. Nation

who have the goal of commercial production as well as
contributing to family food supply. The vast majority of
private irrigation group members were male. In this case,
‘‘private’’ refers both to the restrictive nature of member-
ship and the use of private capital for irrigation investment.
In contrast to the male irrigation groups described above,
these private irrigation groups were often organized for
individual, not household, production and proﬁt. Private
irrigation ﬁelds (and all other irrigation land in the Upper
Valley) were not privately owned but owned by the state
under the National Land Law (1964), which has an uneasy
co-existence with customary land tenure systems in Sene-
gal. According to the National Land Law,
individuals
wanting to put land under productive use must apply to the
local rural council for permission to do so (Bloch 1986). In
the Upper Valley, the rural councils were established from
1982 to 1984. Since that
time, male members of the
councils and their associates have successfully applied for
permission to establish several private irrigation ﬁelds in
the region, in some cases displacing other cultivators. In a
village downstream from Bakel, women were ousted from
land that had been allocated to a men’s irrigation group (a
group with male only membership). After protesting this
action, SAED promised to construct the women an irriga-
tion ﬁeld of their own on another site, which the rural
council then allocated to an individual constructing a pri-
vate irrigation ﬁeld. The women ﬁnally received a parcel of
lesser quality land for their ﬁeld (Miller 1989, p. 10). Pri-
vate irrigation ﬁelds reﬂect
the increasing capital and
commodity orientation of irrigated agriculture and the
growing power of male economic and political elites in the
Upper Valley, a situation that has changed the socio-
political order in the area as well.

Women recognized that

they were losing access to
irrigation land. In a few villages where this became pro-
nounced, groups of women successfully petitioned SAED
for redress in the form of a women’s irrigation ﬁeld. Yet in
terms of the area under irrigation, women’s irrigation ﬁelds
did not balance out the amount of irrigation land controlled
by men. Land allocated to women’s irrigation ﬁelds tended
to be small; in one case, 240 women cultivated 12 ha in
comparison to a men’s group in the same village where 113
men cultivated 81 ha. Such obvious differences in parcel
sizes cultivated by men and women were not unusual even
on the village irrigation ﬁelds where women had greater
access to irrigation land. In several of these irrigation
groups, women were allocated smaller parcels than men, in
some cases half the size. The reasons given for these
smaller parcels were that men needed larger parcels for
household production, women could not afford the higher
fees associated with larger parcels, and women did not
have the time or labor to cultivate larger parcels. Women
in these irrigation groups cultivated these ﬁelds as

123

own-account farmers, much as they cultivated their peanut
ﬁelds, using their own capital for investment and control-
ling the fruits of their labor. Smaller parcels may smack of
clear gender discrimination but as the following sections
will detail, women faced many constraints in participating
in irrigated agriculture and receiving larger irrigation par-
cels would not have necessarily negated these other
concerns.

There is some evidence, although only anecdotal, that
suggests that rates of female membership in irrigation
groups may not have necessarily reﬂected who actually
controls and cultivates irrigation land. Men may have
registered irrigation land in their wives’ names in order to
gain access to a greater amount of irrigation land than is
permitted under a system that assigns equivalent parcel
sizes to each group member, aside from male/female dif-
ferences in parcel sizes. This was a practice widespread
enough to be well known but, unlike the situation described
by Carney (1988) on the Jahaly Pacharr scheme in the
Gambia, not universal in nature. In other words, many
women cultivated as own-account farmers on village irri-
gation ﬁelds, but rates of female participation on these
ﬁelds and on private irrigation lands, which listed few
female members anyway, may have been exaggerated.

(1 ha) adjacent

A few of these general trends were reﬂected in the case
study village. Women’s irrigated plots were 0.275 ha
compared to men’s plots of 0.55 ha. Men and women
cultivated on the same irrigation perimeter, although one
small group of males had established a private perimeter
with exclusively male membership. This case study focuses
only on the village irrigation perimeter. The only separate
irrigation ﬁeld for women was a communally cultivated
vegetable plot
to the main irrigation
perimeter, the proceeds from which were divided among
the producers and sold to support women’s projects in the
village. The in-depth research for this case study did not
reveal any instance of men registering land in their wives’
names. One separate trend reﬂected in the village irrigation
group was a decline in female membership. In 1987,
approximately 140 women were members. This declined to
99 women in 1988 and 90 women in 1990 (Blijdorp 1987).
Reasons for this decline are discussed in the following
sections.

Access to capital and returns to capital

The capitalization of agriculture under irrigation led to a
situation where ‘‘you need money to cultivate.’’ In the
survey results, access to capital and the returns to capital
investment emerged as major reasons why women either
did not participate in irrigated agriculture or quit irrigation
altogether. For these women, gaining access to irrigation

Understanding women’s participation in irrigated agriculture

169

land was not problematic but securing the money to pay the
costs of irrigation was.

Women in the village irrigation group generally bore the
costs of irrigation themselves whereas men, who cultivate
for the household, were given monies for irrigation by the
kagumme. While a few women received money from
husbands (some in the form of migrant remittances) that
could be used toward paying the costs of irrigation, the vast
majority relied upon income-generating activities to accrue
the necessary funds. Marketing agricultural produce was
the major means women used to generate income, and of
this activity, selling vegetables raised on the village irri-
gation ﬁelds during the dry season constituted the most
prevalent way of paying for irrigation costs. Women only
sold rice when they had a signiﬁcant surplus and probably
sold this on the parallel market, rather than through
SAED.5 Since there were no rice hulling machines in the
case study village (and few in the Upper Valley as a whole
during this time), women were at a disadvantage in selling
their rice locally when hulled and polished rice was
available at the village shops.

Credit was largely unavailable to individual producers in
irrigation groups. Some irrigation groups extended credit
for fertilizer purchases to members, but SAED’s credit
program only gave credit to irrigation groups as whole, not
to individuals. Before SAED was restructured in the late
1980s, the agency made credit available to groups for the
purchase of an irrigation pump, diesel fuel, fertilizer and
spare parts. The majority of irrigation groups received such
credit, but few were able to clear these debts. Instead, most
entered a cycle of debt with SAED, not unlike their
counterparts in other regions of the Senegal River Valley.
Structural adjustment
in the agricultural sector ended
SAED’s lending program, and a new agency, the Caisse
Nationale de Credit Agricole de Se´ne´gal
(CNCAS),
assumed responsibility for credit disbursement under new
terms that also did not permit small, individual loans.

With limited means of obtaining capital for irrigation,
women relied on vegetable marketing and other petty
trading to earn money, which in many cases must support
non-agricultural activities as well. Depending on the
manner in which household expenses have been negotiated
between women and their husbands, women may have
assumed considerable responsibility for buying clothing for
themselves and their children, purchasing family foodstuffs

5 Since selling rice on the parallel market was considered an illegal
activity, I did not directly question women about this activity. I
presume that most women sold their rice on the parallel market
because they sold only small quantities of rice (one bag or less),
making it hardly worthwhile to deal with the bureaucratic SAED. As
well, women tended to sell their peanuts through informal channels,
including bartering, so I had no reason to believe that they marketed
their rice any differently.

(such as fruit, vegetables, and meat to supplement the diet),
and buying various household items. Widowed women and
those with inﬁrm husbands obviously are burdened with
total responsibility (outside of charity) for these expenses.
Thus women’s capital expenditure on irrigation was pos-
sible only once their family expenses have been met.
Widowhood, a growing family, or the withdrawal of
spousal support can increase the ﬁnancial burden on a
woman, causing her to quit irrigation in order to reallocate
scarce monies toward family maintenance.

Women’s capital investment in irrigation also involved
weighing the returns to this investment. Although SAED
and others touted irrigation as limiting the risk of culti-
vating in a seasonally arid climate, returns to irrigation
were not certain. Rice, which during the study period
occupied the most irrigation land in the Upper Valley, was
prone to wild ﬂuctuations in yields. In the case study vil-
lage, women reported a rice yield of 212.52 kg per parcel,
equivalent to 0.94 m per hectare, in 1989. This was a
disastrous harvest when compared with the average yield
women received during ‘‘good years,’’ 3.4 m per hectare.6
There are several reasons why rice yields ﬂuctuated
from year to year. During the 1989 rainy season, rainfall
was below average during July when the rice seedlings
began to be established. Rainy season rice cultivation
depended not only on water pumped from the Senegal
River but also rainfall. However, irrigators could not fully
make up this moisture deﬁcit with additional irrigation due
to a diesel fuel shortage in the Upper Valley, not an unu-
sual occurrence in this remote area. Irrigation groups also
faced difﬁculties in obtaining money for extra fuel
expenditures. Compounding these problems was
the
widespread problem of faulty irrigation construction—
poorly constructed canals and poorly leveled ﬁelds that
impeded the gravity ﬂow of water throughout the irrigated
ﬁelds, particularly when water levels were low.

Taking into consideration the costs of fertilizer and the
fees women paid for irrigation, it cost 16,850 CFA francs
for a woman to produce 212.52 kg of paddy rice during
1989.7 If she sold this rice to SAED at the prevailing
producer price of 85 CFA francs per kilogram, she would
have made a meager proﬁt of 576 CFA francs—very little
return on her labor. The cost of buying an equivalent
quantity of hulled rice at a village store was approximately
25,200 CFA francs.8

6 Figures for yields during 1989 were gathered through interviews
with women irrigators. The same women were asked: ‘‘How much
rice do you harvest during good years.’’
7 At the time, $1US equaled approximately 282 CFA francs.
8 When paddy is hulled, it loses between 15 and 20% of its weight. I
have used the lesser ﬁgure of 15% in making these calculations.

123

170

M. L. Nation

While 1989 was an exceptionally poor year, it illustrates
well the risk of irrigated agriculture—a risk compounded
by the expenditure of capital and labor for this activity.
Woodhouse and Ndiaye’s (1991) survey of irrigation in the
Senegal River Valley conﬁrms ﬁndings from the Upper
Valley. They state that ‘‘the greatest problems for farmers
occur not in the area of price [for agricultural inputs] but in
avoiding a disastrous drop in yields’’ (Woodhouse and
Ndiaye 1991, p. 22). In the case study village, some women
said that a low harvest prompted them to quit irrigation,
particularly if there were other, pressing demands on their
time and money. Others, who could afford the risk, con-
tinued to cultivate by irrigation as years of favorable har-
vests may have balanced out the low years over time.

The low rice harvest in 1989 was serious enough to have an
impact on women’s cultivation strategies. When Asian rice
was introduced to the village in the 1970s, most women
stopped cultivating African red rice in favor of its higher
yielding and easier to process Asian cousin. In 1990, women
irrigators decided to recommence red rice cultivation as a risk
aversion strategy. Although red rice is difﬁcult to process, it is
cultivated with little labor and no monetary expenditure. In
this sense, a return to red rice cultivation indicated women’s
lack of conﬁdence in irrigated agriculture.

Men in some Upper Valley irrigation groups sought to
increase the capital returns to irrigation by pursing more
commercial cultivation strategies. This was evident
in
irrigated vegetable production. Male irrigation group
members advocated growing European vegetables, such as
carrots and lettuce, which had a market among the gov-
ernment and expatriate populations in the regional center,
Bakel. Because vegetable seeds were bought in common by
the irrigation group, men imposed this crop choice on
women cultivators, many of whom argued against growing
vegetables that could not contribute to the local diet.
European vegetables did not fare well under local condi-
tions since they require much water and fertilizer and are in
some cases more susceptible to pests than local varieties.
These cultivation problems and the cost of transporting
produce to Bakel made European vegetable production
unproﬁtable and led to an overall decline in vegetable
production in the Upper Valley. The gender conﬂict in
vegetable crop choice was partially resolved in some vil-
lages, such as the case study village, by the establishment
(supported by the Federation of Soninke´ Farmers) of small,
irrigated ‘‘women’s gardens,’’ which women cultivated
collectively, adjacent to the main irrigation ﬁelds.

Allocating labor for irrigation

woman farmer: ‘‘With irrigation, there is more to think
about.’’ Women faced a particular challenge in allocating
their labor for irrigation as this labor was already stretched
across a myriad of agricultural and domestic tasks. Typi-
cally, they could call only on the labor of their unmarried
daughters and daughters-in-law to assist them with their
work.

It is perhaps logical to assume that women engaging in
irrigated agriculture would drop other,
less productive
agricultural activities in favor of irrigated rice and vege-
table production. Indeed, SAED promoted irrigation as an
agricultural technique that would subsume ﬂood recession
agriculture and much dryland cultivation as well. However,
research showed there was no signiﬁcant difference in the
amount of non-irrigated crops grown by women partici-
pating in irrigated agriculture and those who did not.
Women irrigators added irrigated agriculture to their
agricultural production strategies without altering the
number of non-irrigated crops they cultivate.

This situation begs two questions: why did women
irrigators choose to pursue a labor intensive agricultural
activity in addition to other agricultural labor, and how
could these women accommodate such a burden of agri-
cultural
labor in addition to domestic responsibilities?
Understanding the livelihood strategies women follow
through different periods of their lifecycle provides some
explanation for the former question.

Interviews with 56 married, widowed or divorced
women in the case study village revealed an interesting
pattern of crop production. Young,
recently married
women with small families (an average of less than two
children) tended to grow only peanuts, women’s staple
rainy season crop.9 As women grow older and their fami-
lies grow, they began growing additional crops, such as
okra and indigo. Grain production (rice, millet, and maize)
and irrigated vegetable production was associated with
women who have relatively large families (an average of
four children) and hence were older.

Food security was one reason why women cultivate
additional crops as their families grow larger. The Upper
Valley has long suffered from periodic food shortages, in
part a consequence of farming in a seasonally arid envi-
ronment (Chastanet 1983). Meteorological data suggest that
the incidence of drought increased during the 30 year period
from 1968 to 1998 (Magistro and Lo 2001; Nicholson 2001;
Ojo et al. 2004), perhaps making it more necessary than ever
that women engage in grain farming to augment household
grain production. Chastanet (1991) has suggested that the
heavy male migration from the region, which involves as
much as 40% of the active-aged male population, has forced

Irrigated agriculture is more time and labor consuming than
dryland farming, a difference aptly expressed by one

9 Unmarried teenage girls begin cultivating their own small peanut
ﬁelds and assist their mothers with peanut cultivation on larger ﬁelds.

123

Understanding women’s participation in irrigated agriculture

171

women into grain production, although her assertions are
disputed by Manchuelle (1989) and Weigel (1982) who
argue that migrant laborers have taken up the slack in
household grain production. Aside from these debates,
women themselves cited family food security as a major
reason for growing irrigated rice: ‘‘I am poor and have many
children. I need to get food for them’’; ‘‘I have no money to
buy rice, so I cultivate rice’’; and ‘‘rice is important food for
children.’’

Yet, understanding why women pursue a labor-intensive
activity like irrigated agriculture also demands an expla-
nation of how they accommodate this activity into their
schedule of both agricultural and domestic work. Women
irrigators were no more likely than women not involved in
irrigation to have assistance with their agricultural work.
Most women stated that they received no assistance with
their irrigated vegetable and rice parcels, although some
family labor may have been unreported. It is, however,
likely that
levels of family assistance (daughters and
daughters-in-law) were lower on the irrigated parcels than
on dryland parcels. Members of the village irrigation group
were bound by rules governing members’ collective work
on irrigated ﬁelds (maintenance of canals, for example) and
their watering of parcels.
Individual members were
responsible for collective work and watering—surrogates
were not permitted to engage in these tasks for members.
An examination of labor allocation to domestic work
reveals that women irrigators were able to free time in the
domestic sphere to accommodate the labor intensity of
irrigation (Table 1). Women who participated in irrigated
agriculture were much more likely to receive assistance
with their domestic work than women who did not.10
Unmarried daughters, other unmarried female relatives
(such as younger sisters and nieces), unmarried sons,
daughters-in-law, and (infrequently) hired female labor
were sources of assistance with processing grains, fetching
water, gathering fuelwood, childminding, washing clothes,
and cleaning the house.11 Most assistance came from
girls—unmarried daughters and unmarried female rela-
tives. This assistance was critical because during the study
period, the case study village had few machines or inno-
vations to aid women in their domestic work. Women used

10 A chi-square test of the difference of assistance among irrigators
and non-irrigators conﬁrmed that this assistance does vary when
testing at the .05 signiﬁcance level.
11 Data on domestic work were gathered by asking each woman to
state whether or not she received assistance with the domestic tasks
listed. Questions speciﬁcally dealing with certain tasks, such as
fuelwood gathering and water drawing, allowed for some cross-
checking of responses. As with agricultural labor, children’s assis-
tance with domestic labor is probably under-reported because it may
not be perceived as ‘‘assistance’’ but as the child’s responsibility.
However, there is no reason why under-reporting would vary enough
among irrigators and non-irrigators to invalidate the results reported.

Table 1 Division of labor in domestic work among women irrigators
and non-irrigators

Who provides assistance
with domestic work?

Irrigators
(n = 19)

Non-irrigators
(n = 37)

No assistance

Girls help

Boys help

Girls and boys help

Other women help

Other women and girls help

Girls do all work

Other women do all work

4

10

1

1

1

0

0

2

22

6

2

2

1

1

1

2

a recently introduced millet mill sporadically; none inter-
viewed could afford to pay for this convenience on a reg-
ular basis. Drought and indiscriminate cutting of trees
limited the amount of fuelwood close to the village, forcing
women and their children to go further and further into the
bush for wood. While a few household compounds had
wells in their courtyards,
the majority of women and
children drew water from the river several times a day to
meet household needs.

Family size was one factor that inﬂuenced assistance
with domestic work. Women irrigators had an average of
four children while non-irrigators had an average of three
children. Larger families have two implications for women
irrigators. As noted above, women with larger families
have to diversify their agricultural production and take on
crops other than peanuts to satisfy their family’s food
needs. More importantly in terms of labor allocation, larger
families enabled a woman to relinquish some of her
domestic tasks and childcare to her older children. In this
case, whether or not a woman has older female children
affected her ability to participate in irrigated agriculture.
Women involved in irrigation were found to have twice as
many daughters between the ages of eight and 15 years old
than women not involved in irrigation. Girls in this age
range are more likely to assist their mothers with domestic
tasks than younger or older daughters (who are typically
married). Therefore, it appears that the ability to mobilize
assistance with domestic labor may have inﬂuenced
women’s ability to engage in irrigated agriculture.

Control over irrigation technology: new gender
relations in agricultural production

During the case study period, it became clear that new
gender relations in agricultural production accompanied
the introduction of irrigation technology in the Upper
Valley and inﬂuenced the nature of women’s participation
in irrigated agriculture. In all other types of agricultural

123

172

M. L. Nation

production, men and women cultivated ﬁelds separately,
only assisting one another occasionally with special tasks,
such as clearing the land and harvesting crops. Women
were independent, own-account farmers, and their work
was neither supervised nor dictated by males. In irrigated
agriculture, irrigation infrastructure bound women and men
together. Both were dependent on the irrigation pump and
system of canals for their agricultural production, and both
had to cooperate to assure the operation of this infra-
structure. Women and men, working in separate work-
groups, coordinated their labor to weed and maintain the
earthen canals. Irrigation group membership depended on
this contribution of labor.

these women were seldom consulted about

Despite the need for collective work on the village
irrigation ﬁelds, male irrigators assumed more control over
the irrigation system and its technology than women did. A
group of elected ofﬁcers undertook the decision making for
the irrigation group, making critical decisions on when and
how long to irrigate the ﬁelds. In 1990, all of the irrigation
group ofﬁcers in the Upper Valley were men, with the
exception of the ofﬁcers for the women’s irrigation ﬁelds.
All of the pump operators were men, even on the women’s
irrigation ﬁelds. Some irrigation lands with separate
women’s gardens had female presidents who organized
women’s workgroups on the main irrigation ﬁelds. How-
ever,
the
operation of the irrigation infrastructure. Similar situations
have been documented in irrigation schemes in Sri Lanka
and Bali, just to name a few (Athukorala 1996; Jha 2004).
The effect of male decision-making dominance on
women irrigators was mixed—accepted in some contexts
but not
In the case study village, women
acknowledged that the constraints on their time and labor
left them with little time to spend on irrigation. They
appreciated the work that men contributed to the operation
of the irrigation group. SAED made few attempts to
directly engage women in its extension efforts. Instead, it
left such agricultural extension work to organizations like
the FAO, which focused more on food processing tech-
niques than cultivation. Women interviewed on this issue
tended to attribute this slight to their own lack of literacy
and lack of time to participate in any training. These
women noted that men shared cultivation information with
them. In a sense, women ceded some decision-making
power to males in the irrigation group in exchange for less
demand on their time and labor. This new gender relations
of agricultural production involved men exercising some
control over women’s production as will be described
below.

in others.

At issue was the degree of control men, especially the
ofﬁcers, exercised over women’s irrigation. Women’s
access to and control over irrigation water emerged as a
pivotal
issue during the 1989 rainy season. Although

123

women on many other village irrigation groups had lost the
right to irrigate their own ﬁelds to males, in the case study
village women had maintained this critical right. As noted
above, rainfall in 1989 was insufﬁcient to support rice
seedlings and led to additional demands on irrigation. Male
irrigation group members claimed that women were exac-
erbating this already tough situation by over-irrigating their
parcels and were, in effect, wasting precious diesel fuel.
They decided to appropriate women’s rights to irrigate, an
act
that women resented particularly when the harvest
resulted in exceptionally low yields. The few women who
received decent yields attributed this to having parcels
adjacent to men’s parcels that were well-watered. In effect
the women received the beneﬁt of seepage from the men’s
parcels, indicating that some men were over-watering their
plots.

Low yields notwithstanding,

the appropriation of
women’s irrigation rights took irrigated production even
further from women’s control. Beyond the irrigation ﬁeld,
women were independent, own-account farmers, but in the
irrigation group, their production fell under an increasing
amount of male control. Pump and canal irrigation neces-
sitates an organization to assure that water is delivered to
all parts of the ﬁeld on a timely basis. While women were
willing to relinquish some power to this organization, they
still regarded the parcels in the irrigation ﬁeld as their own
province where they made the key production decisions.
Men controlling water delivery to individual parcels was
no small matter for women irrigators, as was revealed in
individual and group interviews with women and men.
These women considered water control as a right; they
wanted more than just access to water as a resource, they
also wanted some control over delivery of this resource.
Male irrigation ofﬁcers, on the other hand, tended to triv-
ialize the dispute. However, the conﬂicts over European
vegetable production illustrated women’s unwillingness to
have certain aspects of production dictated to them. Seen in
this light, women’s recommencement of red rice cultiva-
tion in 1990 was not just a risk aversion strategy but per-
haps also an attempt to regain traditional control over
agricultural production.

Further changes in gender relations have also occurred
in irrigated agriculture. In rainfed agriculture, women’s
work on men’s ﬁelds was limited to assistance during
harvest-time. The idea of working on men’s rainfed ﬁelds
during the growing season was amusing to most women
interviewed. Yet, there were instances of women working
on men’s irrigated ﬁelds during planting and weeding
times. Roughly half of the women interviewed who had
quit irrigation in the past (due to low returns to capital and
labor) reported that they then helped their husbands with
irrigation. These women receive some vegetables and rice
in return for their work without risking any of their capital

Understanding women’s participation in irrigated agriculture

173

or much of their time and labor on irrigation. The impli-
cations of this change are not clear—working on husband’s
ﬁelds could be construed as a risk aversion strategy and/or
as further evidence of women’s marginalization in irrigated
agriculture.

Discussion and conclusion

This case study illustrates the complexity of gender rela-
tions within the household regarding the allocation of
labor, time, and capital to agricultural production; these
allocations are all the subject of bargaining and struggle
within the household (Guyer 1981, p. 101). Assumptions
that irrigation planners have about women’s capacity to
participate in irrigated agriculture may not be founded in
the reality of intra-household labor allocation. Planners
may justify allocating plots to only males in the household
on the premise that women cannot accommodate the
increased labor requirements of irrigated agriculture vis-a`-
vis their other household and agricultural tasks. Zwartev-
een (1996) found on an irrigation scheme in Burkina Faso
that women with their own irrigated plots were as pro-
ductive as men and that women’s productivity did not
include a withdrawal of labor from men’s irrigated plots.
Labor for irrigated agriculture came from reallocating
certain household and agricultural tasks to daughters and
from lessening labor inputs to some rainfed production.
The latter was possible because women judged the returns
from irrigation to exceed those of rainfed production.

In the Upper Valley of the Senegal River, understanding
intra-household labor allocation was critical for discerning
how women accommodate the relatively high labor
requirements of
irrigated agriculture. An analysis of
women’s agricultural strategies revealed that women irri-
gators did not stop cultivating rainfed crops in favor of
irrigated ones nor did they rely on household labor for
rainfed crops any more than non-irrigators. Instead, women
irrigators were more likely to have assistance with
domestic labor, largely from elder daughters, than women
who did not participate in irrigated agriculture. Technolo-
gies, such as improved wood stoves (highly promoted
during the study period) and grain processing machinery
had a potential role in reducing women’s labor and freeing
it for work on irrigation plots, although use of these tech-
nologies involved a decision about capital
investment.
During the study period, women preferred to substitute
labor for capital and involved juvenile girl children in time
consuming tasks. Thus, women’s ability to participate in
irrigated agriculture depended on their control of house-
hold labor.

Irrigation development in the Upper Valley resulted in
new gender relations in agricultural production where men

exercised some control over women’s production—a situ-
ation quite different than that in traditional agriculture. The
research shows that women gave up some control over
production in exchange for fewer demands on their time
and labor. Zwarteveen (1996) makes the point that women
gain bargaining power in the household through farming
plots of their own versus working on men’s plots because
this gives women a fall back position in case of widowhood
or dissolution of marriage. Women’s recommencement of
red rice production may have been a means for regaining
bargaining power, albeit outside of irrigated agriculture.

At the same time, it is difﬁcult to conclude in general
terms that participation in irrigated agriculture as an own-
account farmer with low returns to capital and labor actu-
ally enhances women’s bargaining position in comparison
with working on men’s plots. The latter may be more
proﬁtable and allow women to invest time, labor, and
capital in more productive activities, as O’Laughlin (2007,
p. 38) suggests. Research has examined the nature of what
Whitehead (1981, p. 88) has termed as the ‘‘conjugal
contract’’—the exchange of goods, services, and labor
between husbands and wives in a household. O’Laughlin
(1995) questions whether a focus on the autonomy of
women farmers in Africa has obscured our understanding
of the importance of conjugal ties in the organization of
production and reproduction. Her research indicates that
even in situations where women have some degree of
autonomy, conjugal relations of cooperation and conﬂict
can shape their decisions. It could be equally true that
working on men’s plots was a ‘‘patriarchal bargain’’
(Kandiyoti 1988) that further marginalized women, an
example of conjugal cooperation that held material beneﬁts
for women (Jackson 2007), or a risk aversion strategy by
women who faced high costs of irrigated production and
the uncertainties of rainfed production in the Sahel during a
multi-decade drought.

Decisions about women’s allocation of their own labor
are shaped not only by relationships with husbands and other
household members but are also embedded in larger strug-
gles regarding the use of land, commodity prices, and input
charges, a point amply made by O’Laughlin (2007) in her
critique of Jones’ (1986) study of gender and rice production
in Cameroon. This study in the Upper Valley suggests that
understanding the full impacts of the commodiﬁcation and
capitalization of agriculture is a critical element in assessing
women’s participation in irrigated agriculture.

Although irrigation introduced a more equitable distri-
bution of land with high production potential,
it also
resulted in a more intensive capitalization and commodi-
ﬁcation of agriculture. The major reasons why women (and
some men as well) did not participate in irrigated agri-
culture revolved around access to capital and the returns to
capital
investment. Women generally bore the cost of

123

174

M. L. Nation

irrigation activities themselves through their income-gen-
erating activities. Low yields and hence low returns on
capital investment forced some women out of irrigated
agriculture.

The capitalization and commodiﬁcation of agriculture
fueled competition for irrigation land. Male economic and
political elites emerged as a new socio-political force that
altered the dynamics of irrigated agriculture away from a
system of assuring equitable access to land for (largely)
family subsistence to a situation where increasing amounts
of
land were allocated for private, commodity-driven
endeavors. Some redress for women came through the
establishment of women’s irrigation groups with their own
irrigation ﬁelds. As men sought to exploit regional markets
for European vegetables, women pushed back and
demanded space for collective women’s gardens adjacent
to the village irrigation land where they could grow veg-
etables for their families and local markets.

In the case study village, the number of women culti-
vating their own irrigated plots decreased over
time.
Despite the constraints detailed above, some women found
it proﬁtable to continue irrigated agriculture. These women
shared some characteristics. They had large families to
feed, which pushed them into grain production. At the
same time, they were able to mobilize the labor of older
daughters to take on domestic work, freeing the mothers to
concentrate more on agricultural production. These women
irrigators had access to capital through migrant remittances
and selling agricultural products and cooked foods in the
local markets. With this money, they were able to meet
their household expenditures and have money leftover for
investment
these
women were able to weather years of bad yields with the
hope that better yields would balance out their returns over
time. A few women were lucky and beneﬁted from plots
that
received seepage from the irrigation canals that
enhanced the production potential of their plots.

in irrigated agriculture. Furthermore,

Given the decline in women’s own account irrigated
farming in the case study village, it is tempting to conclude
that women may be more risk averse than men with regard
to allocating labor and other resources to irrigated agri-
culture. The research evidence does not fully support this
assertion. In the Upper Valley, women were negotiating
their
roles in irrigated agriculture at multiple scales,
including the household scale. Some of this negotiation and
bargaining involved tradeoffs in control over production.
At the very least, this suggests that women were actively
shaping their participation in irrigated agriculture rather
than simply being passive victims of bad development or
ignored by development planners as previously portrayed
in the women in development literature (Rogers 1980).

Policies and practices seeking to stimulate agricultural
production through only adjusting the gender distribution

123

of resources may be doomed to the same failure as past
policies that largely ignored women farmers. Even the
irrigation scheme in the case study village, which gave
women access to land and water, could not insure women’s
participation in irrigated agriculture. It is necessary to open
the black box of the household to properly understand how
and why women may participate in irrigated agriculture.
Policymakers and practitioners must consider the intra-
household distribution of labor and resources across all
household activities,
and otherwise, on
women’s ability to participate in irrigated agriculture as
well as the impacts of agricultural commodiﬁcation. As
climate change exacerbates conditions in an already
drought-prone region, the push for more water control in
agriculture will continue. Understanding the constraints,
opportunities, and challenges faced by Sahelian women
farmers in the past is critical for promoting food security in
the 21st century.

agricultural

Acknowledgements
I would like to thank the Fe´de´ration de Pay-
sans Organise´s en Zone Soninke´ for permitting me access to one of
their member villages for this research. In particular, I am indebted to
the late Adrian Adams and Diabe´ Sow for their support and wisdom.
Many people in Senegal assisted me with this work, including my
translator Diogou Bathily and my friend Astou Bathily, and I thank
them for their help and friendship. Rodney White at the University of
Toronto worked with me on the analysis of this research while I was a
PhD student, and Christopher Boone generously gave his time to
create the maps in this paper. Joseph Tainter, Alexandra Brewis
Slade, and Christopher Boone read through earlier versions of the
paper and made helpful comments. I also thank the three anonymous
reviewers for their tremendous insights. The ﬁeld research for this
paper was funded through scholarships from the University of Tor-
onto and support from Project Ecoville, an initiative of the Interna-
tional Federation of Institutes for Advanced Study.

References

Adams, A. 1985. La terre et les gens du ﬂeuve. Paris: Harmattan.
Adams, A. 1979. An open letter to a young researcher. African Affairs

78 (313): 451–479.

Adams, A., and J. So. 1996. A claim to land by the river: A household

in Senegal 1720–1994. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Agarwal, B. 1997a. ‘‘Bargaining’’ and gender relations: Within and

beyond the household. Feminist Economics 3 (1): 1–51.

Agarwal, B. 1997b. Editorial: Re-sounding the alert—gender,
resources, and community action. World Development 25 (9):
1373–1380.

Athukorala, K. 1996. The need for gender analysis in strategic
planning for effective water management in Sri Lanka. Water
Resources Development 12 (4): 447–459.

Batterbury, S., and A. Warren. 2001. The African Sahel 25 years after
the great drought: Assessing progress and moving towards new
agendas and approaches. Global Environmental Change 11 (1):
1–8.

Blijdorp, A. 1987. Roˆle des femmes Soninke´s dans las production
irrigue´e et renforcement d’associations des femmes en vue des
cultures irrigue´es: Re´gion de Bakel. St. Louis Senegal: Projet
Gestion de l’Eau, A.D.R.A.O.

Understanding women’s participation in irrigated agriculture

175

Bloch, P. 1986. Senegal: Senegal River Basin. Paper No. 90.

Madison, WI: Land Tenure Center, University of Wisconsin.

Carney, J. 1988. Struggles over land and crops in an irrigated rice
scheme: The Gambia. In Agriculture, women, and land, ed. J.
Davidson, 59–78. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.

Carney, J. 1998. Women’s land rights in Gambian irrigated rice
schemes: Constraints and opportunities. Agriculture and Human
Values 15 (4): 325–336.

Chambers, R., and J. Moris, eds. 1973. MWEA: An irrigated rice

settlement in Kenya. Munich: Weltforum Verlag.

Chastanet, M. 1983. Les crises de subsistances dans les villages
Soninke´ du cercle de Bakel, de 1858 a` 1945. Cahiers d’Etudes
Africaines 23 (1–2): 5–36.

Chastanet, M. 1991. Crises et re´gulation en pays Soninke´ (Se´ne´gal)
depuis le milieu du XIXe sie`cle. Cahiers des Sciences Humaines
27 (1–2): 131–145.

Conti, A. 1979. Capitalist organization of production through non-
in
capitalist relations: Women’s role in a pilot resettlement
Upper Volta. Review of African Political Economy 6 (15/16):
75–92.

Costanza, R., L. Graumlich, W. Steffen, C. Crumley, J. Dearing, K.
Hibbard, R. Leemans, C. Redman, and D. Schimel. 2007.
Sustainability or collapse: What can we learn from integrating
the history of humans and the rest of nature? Ambio 36 (7): 522–
527.

Crow, B., and F. Sultana. 2002. Gender, class, and access to water:
Three cases in a poor and crowded delta. Society and Natural
Resources 15 (8): 709–724.

Delgado, J., and M. Zwarteveen. 2007. The public and private domain
of the everyday politics of water. International Feminist Journal
of Politics 9 (4): 503–511.

Dey, J. 1981. Gambian women: Unequal partners in rice development

projects? Journal of Development Studies 17 (3): 109–122.

Jones, C. 1986.

Intra-household bargaining in response to the
introduction of new crops: A case study from North Cameroon.
In Understanding Africa’s
rural households and farming
systems, ed. J.L. Moock, 105–123. Boulder, CO: Westview
Press.

Kandiyoti, D. 1988. Bargaining with patriarchy. Gender and Society 2

(3): 274–290.

Lericollais, A., and Y. Diallo. 1980. Peuplement et cultures de saison
se`che dans la valle´e du Se´ne´gal. Notice Explicative No. 81,
Cartes A-G. Paris: ORSTOM.

Lynch, B.D. 1997. Women and irrigation in highland Peru. In Women
working in the environment, ed. C. Sachs, 85–101. Washington,
DC: Taylor and Francis.

MacPhail, F. 1993. Displacement, divisions, and decisions: The
impact of irrigation technology on women in South Sulawesi,
Indonesia. Canadian Journal of Development Studies 14: 229–
248.

Magistro, J., and M. Lo. 2001. Historical and human dimensions of
climate variability and water resource constraint in the Senegal
River Valley. Climate Research 19 (2): 133–147.

Manchuelle, F. 1989. The ‘‘patriarchal

migrants: From slave owners to employers of
Canadian Journal of African Studies 23 (1): 106–125.

ideal’’ of Soninke labor
free labor.

Miller, D. 1989. Irrigation and the dynamics of access to land in the
village of Moudery. Madison, WI: Land Tenure Center, Univer-
sity of Wisconsin.

Nicholson, S.E. 2001. Climatic and environmental change in Africa
during the last two centuries. Climate Research 17 (2): 123–144.
O’Brien, K., R. Leichenko, U. Kelkar, H. Venema, G. Aandahl, H.
Tompkins, A. Jared, S. Bhadwal, S. Barg, L. Nygaard, and J.
West. 2004. Mapping vulnerability to multiple stressors: Climate
change and globalization in India. Global Environmental
Change 14 (4): 303–313.

Dey, J. 1982. Development planning in the Gambia: The gap between
planners’ and famers’ perceptions, expectations, and objectives.
World Development 10 (5): 377–396.

O’Laughlin, B. 1995. Myth of the African family in the world of
development. In Women wielding the hoe, ed. D. Bryceson, 63–
92. Oxford, UK: Berg Publishers.

Eriksen, S., K. Brown, and P. Kelly. 2005. The dynamics of
vulnerability: Locating coping strategies in Kenya and Tanzania.
The Geographical Journal 171 (4): 287–305.

Euroconsult/RIN. 1990. Proﬁl de l’environnement de la valle´e du

ﬂeuve Se´ne´gal. The Netherlands: Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

Guyer, J. 1981. Household and community in African Studies.

African Studies Review 24 (2/3): 87–137.

Haberl, H., V. Winiwarter, K. Andersson, R.U. Ayres, C. Boone, A.
Castillo, G. Cunfer, M. Fischer-Kowalski, W.R. Freudenburg, E.
Furman, R. Kaufmann, F. Krausmann, E. Langthaler, H. Lotze-
Campen, M. Mirtl, C.L. Redman, A. Reenberg, A. Wardell, B.
Warr, and H. Zechmeister. 2006. From LTER to LTSER:
Conceptualizing the socioeconomic dimension of
long-term
socioecological research. Ecology and Society 11: 13–39.

Harris, L. 2006. Irrigation, gender, and social geographies of the
changing waterscapes of southeastern Anatolia. Environment
and Planning D: Society and Space 24 (2): 187–213.

IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2007. Climate
change 2007: Impacts, adaptation and vulnerability. Working
Group II contribution to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change fourth assessment report, summary for policymakers.
Geneva, Switzerland: I.P.C.C. Secretariat.

O’Laughlin, B. 2007. A bigger piece of a very small pie:
Intrahousehold resource allocation and poverty reduction in
Africa. Development and Change 38 (1): 21–44.

Ojo, O., S.O. Gbuyiro, and C.U. Okoloye. 2004. Implications of
climatic variability and climate change for water resources
availability and management in West Africa. GeoJournal 61 (2):
111–119.

Palmer, I. 1985. The Nemow case. West Hartford, CT: Kumarian

Press.

Ramamurthy, P. 1991. Rural women and irrigation: Patriarchy, class,
and the modernizing state of South-India. Society and Natural
Resources 4 (1): 5–22.

Rao, A., M. Anderson, and C. Overholt, eds. 1991. Gender analysis in

development planning. West Hartford, CT: Kumarian Press.

Rogers, B. 1980. The domestication of women: Discrimination in

developing societies. New York: Tavistock Publications.

Somado, E.A., R.G. Guei, and S.O. Keya, eds. 2008. NERICA: The
new rice for Africa—a compendium. Cotonou, Benin: Africa
Rice Center.

Uhlir, P. 2003. Scientiﬁc data for decision making toward sustainable
development: Senegal River Basin case study. Washington, DC:
The National Academies Press.

Jackson, C. 1985. The Kano River irrigation project. West Hartford,

USAID. 1990. Mid-term evaluation report: Irrigation and Water

CT: Kumarian Press.

Management I Project. Dakar: USAID.

Jackson, C. 1998. Gender, irrigation, and environment: Arguing for

agency. Agriculture and Human Values 15 (4): 313–324.

Jackson, C. 2007. Resolving risk? Marriage and creative conjugality.

Development and Change 38 (1): 107–129.

Jha, N. 2004. Gender and decision making in Balinese agriculture.

American Ethnologist 31 (4): 552–572.

van Koppen, B. 1998. Water rights, gender, and poverty alleviation.
Inclusion and exclusion of women and men smallholders in
public irrigation infrastructure development. Agriculture and
Human Values 15 (4): 361–374.

Vandersypen, K., K. Bengaly, A.C.T. Keita, S. Sidibe, D. Raes, and
J.- Jamin. 2006. Irrigation performance at tertiary level in the

123

176

M. L. Nation

rice schemes of the Ofﬁce du Niger (Mali): Adequate water
delivery through over-supply. Agricultural Water Management
83 (1–2): 144–152.

Venema, H.D., E.J. Schiller, K. Adamowski, and J.M. Thizy. 1997. A
water resources planning response to climate change in the
Senegal River Basin. Journal of Environmental Management 49
(1): 125–155.

Weigel, J.-Y. 1982. Migration et production domestique des Soninke´

du Se´ne´gal. Paris, France: ORSTOM.

White, S. 1992. Arguing with the crocodile: Gender and class in

Bangladesh. London, UK: Zed Books.

Whitehead, A. 1981. ‘‘I’m hungry, mum’’: The politics of domestic
budgeting. In Of marriage and the market, ed. K. Young, C.
Wolkowitz, and R. McCullagh, 88–111. London, UK: CSE
Books.

Woodhouse, P., and I. Ndiaye. 1991. Structural adjustment and
irrigated agriculture in Senegal. Irrigation Management Network
Paper No. 7. London, UK: Overseas Development, Institute
Regent’s College.

Zwarteveen, M. 1995. Linking women to the main canal: Gender and

irrigation management. London, UK: IIED.

Zwarteveen, M. 1996. A plot of one’s own: Gender relations and
irrigated land allocation policies in Burkina Faso. Research
Report No. 10. Colombo, Sri Lanka: International Irrigation
Management Institute.

Zwarteveen, M. 1997. Water: From basic need to commodity: A
discussion on gender and water rights in the context of irrigation.
World Development 25 (8): 1335–1349.

Author Biography

Marcia L. Nation is Project Manager for the Central Arizona-
Phoenix Long-Term Ecological Research (CAP LTER) project, based
at the Global Institute of Sustainability, Arizona State University,
Tempe, Arizona. She has a PhD in geography from the University of
Toronto and specializes in the areas of socio-ecological research,
gender, sustainability, and community development. She worked for
several years as a consultant and gender expert in the non-govern-
mental sector and in other capacities has provided evaluation and
performance measurement services for non-proﬁt and governmental
organizations.

123

