Feed the Future 
Senegal Naatal Mbay Project
Women's Economic Empowerment Strategy

CONTRACT AID-685-C-15-00001 

 

Women’s Economic Empowerment Strategy 

 
FEED THE FUTURE SENEGAL–NAATAL MBAY 

CONTRACT AID-685-C-15-00001  

 

 

 

 

 

 

August 2016 

 

 

 

Submitted by International Resources Group (IRG) 

 

DISCLAIMER 
The author’s views expressed in this publication do not necessarily reflect the views of the United States Agency for 
International Development or the United States Government. 

 
 

 
 

CONTENTS 

 

Contents .................................................................................................................................... i 

Acronyms ................................................................................................................................. ii 

Executive summary ................................................................................................................. 1 

Introduction ............................................................................................................................. 4 

Methodology ............................................................................................................................ 4 

Guiding principles .................................................................................................................... 5 

Background .............................................................................................................................. 7 
Project zone of influence (ZOI) .................................................................................................................... 7 
Gendered household characteristics within the project ZOI ................................................................ 8 
Women’s participation and roles in project value chains by zone ........................................................ 8 
Senegal River Valley (SRV): Irrigated rice ........................................................................................................................................................................... 9 
Groundnut Basin: Maize, millet and rainfed rice ............................................................................................................................................................ 10 
Southern Forest Zone (SFZ): Rainfed rice, millet and maize ...................................................................................................................................... 10 
Women’s empowerment in agriculture .................................................................................................... 11 
Access to productive resources ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 11 
...................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 11 
Land 
Inputs and agricultural equipment ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 11 
Credit  ...................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 11 
Participation and influence in household decisions ................................................................................. 12 
Participation and leadership in organizations ........................................................................................... 12 
Time use ........................................................................................................................................................... 13 

Women’s economic empowerment theory of change and strategy 

recommendations ...................................................................................................... 13 
Theory of change ............................................................................................................................................ 13 
Strategy recommendations ........................................................................................................................... 14 

Implementation guidance and next steps .......................................................................... 17 

Appendix A: Value chain production by zone and gender of household head ............... 18 

Appendix B: Value chain production costs by zone and gender of household 

head ............................................................................................................................. 21 

 

 

 

FEED THE FUTURE SENEGAL – NAATAL MBAY – WEE Strategy  

i 

ACRONYMS 

Adapted-WEAI 
Community-level Service Provider 
Consolidation Network 

A-WEAI 
CLSP 
CN 
FEPROMAS  Fédération Coopérative des Producteurs de Maïs du Saloum 
FHH 
FPP 
GIF 
IRG 
M&E 
MHH 
MPP 
PCE 
PO 
REFAN 
RF 
SFZ 
SPRING 
 
SRV 
WEAI 
WEE 
ZOI 

Female-headed household 
Female parcel producer 
Gender Integration Framework 
International Resources Group 
Monitoring & Evaluation 
Male-headed household 
Male parcel producer 
Projet Croissance Economique 
Producer Organization 
Réseau des femmes agricultrices du Nord 
Rainfed 
Senegal Forest Zone 
Strengthening Partnerships, Results, and Innovations in Nutrition 
Globally  
Senegal River Valley 
Women’s Empowerment in Agriculture Index 
Women’s Economic Empowerment 
Zone of Influence 

 
 

ii  
 

FEED THE FUTURE SENEGAL – NAATAL MBAY –WEE Strategy 

 
 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

Overview 

 

The Women’s Economic Empowerment (WEE) Strategy presents a strategy to address gender 
issues at the project level, with the specific objectives of ensuring that women are empowered by 
project activities and that project activities do not inadvertently either directly or indirectly cause 
harm to women. Project activities, for example, should not increase women’s burden of 
unremunerated labor, erode their social standing at the community or household level, or worsen 
their access to productive resources or returns from employment of those resources. 

The WEE strategy was developed using a data-driven (evidence-based) value chain approach. 
Analytically, we prioritized value chains and intervention strategies on the basis of the extent and 
nature of women’s participation in each value chain, financial returns to production, and the current 
and potential role of crop in women’s incomes and household food security. 

The WEE strategy was developed to be consistent with the following guiding principles: 

  Focus on women’s economic empowerment  
  The strategy should fit within the overarching project framework  
  Account for diversity across the project’s ZOI with respect to household structure, 

ethnicity, and other factors 

  Account for women’s “double workday” and general shortage of free time 
  Address women’s empowerment from both inter-household as well as intra-household 

perspectives  

  Based on a theory of change, data-driven, proactive, flexible and tailored, and emphasize 

learning and adaptive management 

Background 

Naatal Mbay works in three geographic zones, each of which has various sub-zones with varying 
agro-ecological, economic, and ethnic profiles. Specifically, the project is focused on promoting the 
development of the value chains for irrigated rice in the Senegal River Valley (SRV), and for rainfed 
(RF) rice, millet, and maize in the central Groundnut Basin and Senegal Forest Zone (SFZ) zones 
(specifically, Southern Casamance).  

Within the project’s ZOI, 95% of households are headed by males, whereas 5% have female heads. 
Male versus female headed households can be differentiated on the basis of their size, schooling, 
poverty levels, land assets, and agricultural activities. 

Women are involved in productive activities in the target value chains to varying degrees and in 
different ways depending on location, value chain, and ethnicity, among other factors. The majority 
of women provide labor on family farms, working first on their husband’s plots to support 
production of staple cereals. Only after those labor obligations are fulfilled do women work on 
their own small parcels. In general, women contribute significantly to household food security, 
supporting the production of staple crops on both their husbands’ and their own plots, and 
generating income that is used to improve the wellbeing of their families. In the SFZ, women are 
heavily involved in rainfed rice production. Irrigated and rainfed rice offer particularly attractive 
financial returns.  

Women’s access to productive resources—land, agricultural inputs and  equipment, and finance--is 
characteristically more limited than men’s access. Access to these resources typically depends heavily 
on  the  location,  value  chain,  ethnicity,  and  other  factors  such  as  membership  in  producer 
organizations (POs).  

FEED THE FUTURE SENEGAL – NAATAL MBAY – WEE Strategy  

1 

Women’s participation in and ability to influence important household-level decisions around 
production, expenditures and purchases; and control over income is an important factor underlying 
their wellbeing. In general, major decisions are usually the responsibility of men, however as 
women’s contributions to household food supply and finances increase, they tend to have more 
influence in household decision making. Participation in decision making also tends to be higher for 
women who belong to POs.  

Senegalese women have a strong tradition of participation in village-level self-help organizations, however 
they  are  generally  underrepresented  as  either  members  or  leaders  in  POs,  which  tend  to  be  male 
dominated.  
Membership  in  producer  organizations  is  perceived  to  reduce  the  vulnerability  of  women  in 
agricultural production and facilitate their access to productive assets.  

Women  are  recognized  throughout  Africa  to  have  a  “double  workday”  involving  both  economic 
activities  (such  as  agricultural  production  or  entrepreneurship)  and  unremunerated  “social 
reproduction”  responsibilities  such  as  the  care  of  children,  sick,  or  elderly,  food  preparation,  and 
community engagement. The challenge is particularly acute in rural areas of Senegal where women 
have  little  access  to  equipment,  infrastructure,  or  resources  that  can  reduce  the  burden  of  these 
activities, and where they are responsible for providing labor to men’s plots before they can cultivate 
their own.  

Theory of change and strategy recommendations 

 

Naatal Mbay’s technical approach rests on a theory of change in which there exists a “virtuous 
cycle” or positive feedback loop between activities that lead to increased business opportunities in 
domestic cereal value chains, catalyzing smallholder demand for productivity-enhancing inputs and 
management practices, which sustains the emergence of cost-effective and private sector-led 
production support systems. Smallholder production is enhanced through utilization of these inputs 
and management practices, allowing them to increase both their sales and the supply of foods to 
their own families. Together these gains lead to inclusive agricultural growth, enhanced smallholder 
incomes, and improved food security for the whole country.  

Both women and men are eligible to pursue the opportunities inherent in this approach; however 
women tend to be disadvantaged in their ability to engage or succeed in these activities since they 
are less economically empowered than men throughout the ZOI. Thus, the WEE strategy, while 
integrated with the overarching project theory of change, is designed to address key opportunities 
and constraints that affect women’s participation and benefits from project activities, as described in 
the preceding analysis.  

The following recommendations underpin the WEE strategy:  

1.  Retain project focus on cereals value chains (rice, maize, millet) and leverage opportunities 

to economically empower women within those value chains.  

2.  Involve women and women’s organizations in commercial seed production.  
3.  Engage women and women’s organizations to serve as Community-level Service Providers 

(CLSPs).  

4.  Reduce burden of production and post-harvest labor incurred by women in cereals 

production on their own and on men’s plots.  

5.  Tailor trainings and extension to women beneficiaries.  
6.  Strengthen women’s involvement in rice production and markets throughout the project’s 

ZOI.  

7.  Develop, validate, and disseminate labor-saving packages for home and/or village-based 

post-harvest services.  

8.  Explore opportunities for demand-driven value addition involving women.  
9.  Promote the development and involvement of women’s producer organizations working in 

FEED THE FUTURE SENEGAL – NAATAL MBAY –WEE Strategy 

2  
 

 
 

 

project value chains.  

10. Identify, assess, prioritize, and pursue opportunities to enhance women’s access to credit. 
11. Incorporate gender training into staff and partner activities.  
12. Support project partners in sensitization and behavior change communications tailored to 

beneficiary households.  

13. Collaborate with other donor-funded and charitable initiatives to pursue synergies in gender 

programming.  

14. Actively integrate monitoring and evaluation into women’s economic empowerment 

activities to support learning, collaboration, and adaptive management.  

 
Implementation guidance and next steps 
Following finalization of the WEE strategy, a work plan will be developed to guide its 
implementation. Naatal Mbay’s Gender Specialist will lead the development of the work plan with 
support from DC-based Gender and Social Inclusion Advisor. Implementation of the WEE strategy 
and the development of metrics to support its implementation will be spearheaded by the Gender 
Specialist with support from the project’s Communications and M&E Specialists, as well as project 
technical staff. 
 
 
 

FEED THE FUTURE SENEGAL – NAATAL MBAY – WEE Strategy  

3 

INTRODUCTION 

IRG, an Engility company, is pleased to present the Women’s Economic Empowerment (WEE) 
Strategy for the Feed the Future Senegal/Naatal Mbay (Naatal Mbay) project. The objective of 
Naatal Mbay is to significantly scale-up and expand successful value chain approaches, both in terms 
of potential beneficiaries and geographical coverage, in the maize, millet and rice sectors in a way 
that is inclusive and makes use of known best practices and technological packages. Value chain 
programs, when designed with a gender focus, can encompass both competitiveness targets and 
gender equity activities to contribute to poverty reduction goals.  

Naatal Mbay’s programming is organized across three technical components aimed at improving 
agricultural productivity, strengthening agricultural markets, and enhancing the agricultural policy 
environment, as well as cross-cutting themes relating to gender, climate change, capacity building, 
and promoting the project’s learning agenda.  

The WEE strategy presents a strategy to address gender issues at the project level, with the specific 
objectives of ensuring that women are empowered by project activities and/or that project 
activities do not inadvertently either directly or indirectly cause harm to women, for example by 
increasing the burden of unremunerated labor, eroding their social standing at the community or 
household level, or worsening their access to productive resources or returns from employment of 
those resources. The WEE strategy begins with an overview of the methodology by which the 
gender strategies were developed, then presents guiding principles and the theory of change that 
underlie the strategy. Next, essential background information is presented drawing from the 
baseline assessments undertaken by the project. Then gender strategy recommendations are 
detailed, followed by illustrative activities and implementation guidance.  

METHODOLOGY 

The WEE strategy was developed using a data-driven (evidence-based) value chain approach that 
drew from three critical resources. First, Naatal Mbay’s November 2015 population-based baseline 
survey1 (sample size 2,000) was used to characterize producer households in the project’s ZOI with 
respect to their current production and sales of project crops (rice, maize, millet), means of 
production, and financial returns of production. These results were differentiated by gender, 
looking at both intra-household and inter-household variations.  

Second, qualitative results (from the baseline assessment, earlier programmatic and gender-oriented 
assessments, and the gender integration framework) were drawn on to characterize women’s roles 
and constraints in production of project-targeted crops and to enrich interpretation of the 
quantitative results from the large-sample survey.  

Third, the Abbreviated Women’s Empowerment in Agriculture (A-WEAI)2 survey results were 
used to more formally identify critical areas of empowerment that either represent strengths or 
weaknesses vis-à-vis opportunities to improve women’s involvement in the different value chain 
targets and women’s (and their families’) incomes and wellbeing through project interventions. 

Analytically, we used the following criteria to prioritize value chains and intervention areas: 

  Extent of participation of women in each value chain as 

o  Unpaid laborers on fields of male family members and in home-based post-harvest 

activities  

o  Managers and producers on own parcels within male-headed households 
o  Managers and producers as part of female-headed households 

                                            
1 Source: Naatal Mbay (2015) Baseline Study, Feed the Future Senegal Naatal Mbay. 
2 Naatal Mbay (2016) ETUDE BASELINE NAATAL MBAY: VOLET GENRE ET AUTONOMISATION DES FEMMES. 
FEED THE FUTURE SENEGAL – NAATAL MBAY –WEE Strategy 
4  
 

 
 

 

o  Providers of production inputs (e.g. seed) and post-farmgate value-added services 

(e.g. processing and marketing) 

  Characterization of women’s activity within each value chain 

o  Roles and responsibilities in production and post-harvest activities and associated 

labor requirements 

o  Production profiles relative to men (area cultivated, yields, use of improved 

technologies and management practices, etc.) 

  Financial returns on production 
  Role of the value chain in women’s incomes and household food security  

The results of these analyses are presented in the Background section. The outcomes of these 
inquiries were used to identify which value chains had the most potential to benefit women either 
due to high rates of women’s participation in the value chain, attractive potential financial returns, 
or congruence of value chain development requirements with the particular issues and constraints 
faced by women. 

Once the highest potential value chains were identified for each location, further analysis was 
conducted using quantitative and qualitative baseline results to identify strategies to increase the 
benefits of women’s participation in each value chain. Having identified feasible strategies, we drew 
on the A-WEAI and gender integration framework (GIF) results to identify specific constraints (for 
example in the domains of control over productive resources, decision-making power, etc.) that 
would need to be addressed to enable these improvements. 

GUIDING PRINCIPLES 

The WEE strategy was developed to be consistent with a number of guiding principles which are 
detailed below: 

Focus on women’s economic empowerment: The strategy is focused specifically on women’s 
economic empowerment which we define as “the capacity to participate in, contribute to and 
benefit from economic growth processes in ways that recognize the value of women’s 
contributions, respect their dignity and make it possible to negotiate a fairer distribution of the 
benefits of growth.”3 In the context of Naatal Mbay, economic empowerment comes when women 
are active participants in economic decisions that affect them and their families, have access to 
productive resources to pursue economic activities that they value, and have a substantial degree of 
control over the output of their efforts. The implication of this focus on economic empowerment is 
that other forms and facets of empowerment are seen as a means of achieving economic 
empowerment, rather than ends in themselves. We also recognize that different facets of 
empowerment will have different degrees of influence on economic empowerment in different 
contexts, so activities to strengthen these facets of empowerment will be prioritized on the basis of 
their potential contributions to the overarching economic empowerment goal.  

The strategy should fit within the overarching project framework: As a value chain 
development project, Naatal Mbay is focused on cereals value chains—specifically rice, maize, and 
millet. We take it as a guiding principle that all economic empowerment activities should be 
oriented to benefitting women vis-à-vis their participation in these value chains. While Naatal Mbay 
is contractually limited to the above-named cereals value chains, maintaining this focus also has 
strong technical justification given the pervasive involvement of women in these value chains (as will 
be detailed in the Background section). Addressing women’s economic empowerment within the 
overarching project framework has several important implications.  

                                            
3 Definition adapted from http://www.oecd.org/dac/gender-development/womenseconomicempowerment.htm 

FEED THE FUTURE SENEGAL – NAATAL MBAY – WEE Strategy  

5 

First, all gender activities should be related to the project bottom line of promoting inclusive and 
broadly beneficial engagement in the project’s value chains. Second, non-gender specific 
interventions should be proactively evaluated for their potential impacts on women, and revised as 
needed to ensure that they do not either directly or indirectly harm women, and so that they 
benefit women to the greatest extent possible. Third, gender-oriented activities should be 
mainstreamed within the project, with specialized interventions targeted to specific issues that are 
not adequately addressed through a mainstreaming approach. Fourth, all gender-related 
interventions should be able to be explained and justified with reference to the project’s objectives, 
both to project staff and stakeholders. Finally, working the women’s economic empowerment 
strategy into the overarching project framework implies avoiding parallel (or worse, 
“perpendicular,”) activities aimed specifically at women, which have the risk of either diverting 
project resources from their overriding objectives or creating a “side project” aimed at women, but 
which does not receive adequate attention or resources to be effective. Related to these points, it 
is important to note that the overarching project objective is to improve food security in the ZOI, 
with improved incomes representing one means of improving food security, however improved 
food security also implies improved intra-household outcomes, both economic and nutritional.  

Account for diversity with respect to household structure, ethnicity, and other factors, 
across the project’s ZOI: The gender strategy must take into account the diverse roles played 
by women and men across the project’s ZOI given varying ethnicities, household structures (with 
respect to age, family status, and gender of household members), length of time residing in a 
community, resource endowments, and other factors. This means that operationalization of the 
strategy must be tailored to the target clientele, which implies that participatory methods should be 
drawn on extensively in designing and vetting proposed interventions, and in tailoring them to 
specific implementation areas. 

Account for women’s “double workday” (also known as “dual labor burden”): It is 
critical to recognize that in addition to their roles as laborers and entrepreneurs (agricultural and 
others), women are also extensively involved in “social reproduction” at the household and 
community level, and that these unremunerated roles often involve heavy commitment of women’s 
time and economic resources. For example, women are typically heavily involved in child care, food 
preparation, obtaining firewood and water, and in supporting community activities such as festivals 
and funerals. Thus, gender-oriented activities should take into account tradeoffs among all these 
activities, and solicit input from household members (particularly, but not only, from women) about 
how potential changes in women’s allocation of time and resources among these activities will be 
perceived and responded to. 

Address women’s empowerment from both inter-household as well as intra-household 
perspectives: While women-headed households have unique circumstances in terms of their 
access to resources, legal rights, and cultural standing, it is also critical to consider the economic 
empowerment of women within male-headed (or dual-gender headed) households, taking into 
account the standing of women given their age, resource endowments, culture and ethnicity, and 
marital status. It should not be assumed that the nominal head of household or senior female 
exclusively and equally represents the interests of all household members, implying the importance 
of seeking broad input at the family level on the potential impacts of proposed interventions for 
different family members.  

The strategy itself should be theory-based, data-driven, proactive, flexible and tailored, 
and emphasize learning and adaptive management: A data-driven strategy is one that draws 
on the extensive knowledge base about women’s economic empowerment, as well as the local 
realities of women within the project’s ZOI. A data-driven strategy has the best potential to remain 
grounded in and responsive to international best practices and evolving local realities, and to avoid 
common pitfalls in design and implementation. A data-driven strategy requires a well-planned and 
active process of ongoing monitoring and evaluation using both qualitative and quantitative 

6  
 

FEED THE FUTURE SENEGAL – NAATAL MBAY –WEE Strategy 

 
 

 

methods. It must also be grounded in a theory of change that reflects the unique circumstances of 
women in the project context and that is continually evaluated allowing for learning and adaptive 
management to account for emerging results whether they be successes, challenges, or 
disappointments. The strategy must also be proactive rather than reactive, in that it should invest 
heavily on ex ante (anticipatory) analysis to consider and plan for potential impacts (both static and 
dynamic) from a gendered perspective. As results emerge, it is important to be flexible in adapting 
the strategy and its implementation approach to account for these results.  

BACKGROUND 

In this section, we introduce the project’s geographic zone of influence and target value chains, 
provide an overview of women’s involvement in those value chains, and describe the status of 
women’s empowerment in agriculture. Information presented in this section is drawn primarily 
from the baseline results including the large-sample quantitative survey, A-WEAI, and qualitative 
inquiries. 

PROJECT ZONE OF INFLUENCE (ZOI) 

Naatal Mbay works in three geographic zones, each of which has various sub-zones (summarized in 
Table 1 and depicted in the map in Exhibit 1) with varying agro-ecological, economic, and ethnic 
profiles. The project is focused on promoting the development of the value chains for irrigated rice 
in the Senegal River Valley (SRV), and for rainfed (RF) rice, millet, and maize in the Groundnut Basin 
and Southern Forest Zone (SFZ).  

Table 1: Project zones, sub-zones, and value chains 

Zones 

Sub-zones 

Value Chains 

Senegal River Valley (SRV)  

Delta (Dagana) 

Irrigated rice 

Middle Valley (Podor-Matam) 

Irrigated rice 

Groundnut Basin  

Center (Fatick-Kaolack-
Kaffrine) 

Rainfed rice, millet, maize 

Senegal Forest Zone (SFZ)  

Lower Casamance (Ziguinchor)  Rainfed rice, millet, maize 

High and Middle Casamance 
(Kolda-Sédhiou) 

Rainfed rice, millet, maize 

 

FEED THE FUTURE SENEGAL – NAATAL MBAY – WEE Strategy  

7 

Exhibit 1: Naatal Mbay zone of influence and focal value chains 

 

GENDERED HOUSEHOLD CHARACTERISTICS WITHIN THE PROJECT ZOI 

The baseline assessment showed that 95% of households in the project’s ZOI have male heads of 
household, whereas 5% have female heads (nationally, the DHS estimates 20% are female-headed 
households in Senegal). Many female-headed households (FHHs) are comprised of widows who live 
with their eldest married sons. 

Female-headed households tend to be smaller than male-headed households (MHHs), and women 
household heads are nearly twice as likely as male heads of household to have no schooling (41% vs 
21%). While the vast majority of both male and female headed households in the project ZOI are 
either poor or extremely poor, women-headed households are less likely than male to fall into the 
extremely poor category. FHHs are also more likely than MHHs to have family-granted land than 
individually held land (51% family, 42% individual for FHH vs 42% and 50% respectively for MHH). 

While the mean age of the head of household is the same for both MHHs and FHHs (53 years), 
women working crops in MHH tend to be younger than the male heads, whereas in FHH the 
inverse is true—males working crops tend to be younger than the female head. This is a reflection 
of male household heads being assisted by a wife or wives (who are younger than him), whereas 
female headed households are often assisted in their production by their eldest sons. Despite 
having assistance, female heads of household were principally involved in agriculture—particularly in 
irrigated and rainfed rice and maize (depending on zone), with a participation rate of 100%. In the 
Groundnut Basin, they had a lower participation in millet (81%) compared to men (91%).  

WOMEN’S PARTICIPATION AND ROLES IN PROJECT VALUE CHAINS BY 
ZONE 

Women are involved in productive activities in the target value chains to varying degrees and in 
different ways depending on location, value chain, and ethnicity, among other factors. The majority 

8  
 

FEED THE FUTURE SENEGAL – NAATAL MBAY –WEE Strategy 

 
 

 

of women provide labor on family farms, working first on their husband’s plots to support 
production of staple cereals. Only after those labor obligations are fulfilled do women work on 
their own small parcels. Women’s parcels are often cultivated with secondary crops for household 
consumption, such as groundnuts, vegetables, hibiscus, and at times cereals such as rice, maize, or 
millet. In general, women contribute significantly to household food security, supporting the 
production of staple crops on both their husbands’ and their own plots, and generating income that 
is used to improve the wellbeing of their families. Below, specific aspects of women’s involvement in 
project value chains are discussed for each of the project zones.  

Table 2 below summarizes critical elements of women’s involvement in cereal value chains across 
the project’s ZOI, and identifies potential areas to enhance women’s economic empowerment 
through project interventions. Analytical categories for women’s participation include both gender 
of household head (FHH=female household head) as well as the gender of parcel producers within 
a given (male or female-headed) household (FPP=female parcel producer). Particularly notable in 
Table 2 is the heavy involvement of women in rainfed rice production in the Casamance, and the 
attractive financial returns to both irrigated and rainfed rice throughout the project ZOI. Appendix 
A summarizes major aspects of production and sales of the different project crops across the 
project zones and by gender of household head, while Appendix B breaks down production costs 
by value chain across the zones and by gender of household head.  

Table 2: Women’s participation and financial returns by zone and value chain 

 

 

SRV— 

Delta 

SRV— 

Middle 
Valley 

Irrigated Rice 

SFZ  Groundnut 

SFZ   Groundnut 

 

 

Basin 

Basin 

Maize 

Maize 

Millet 

 

 

RF 
Rice
 

 

Current participation of 
women: 

% FHH 

% FPP 

Share of output sold 

Financial returns to 
production: 

Low 

3% 

2% 

42% 

Low 

High 

Medium 

Low 

Medium 

3% 

5% 

20% 

8% 

54% 

7% 

High 

1% 

11% 

0% 

Low 

3% 

3% 

13% 

Low 

4% 

12% 

8% 

Low 

High 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Gross margins/ha in FCFA 

348,000 

210,000 

82,000 

89,000  87,000 

 

 

Source: Naatal Mbay (2015) Baseline Study, Feed the Future Senegal Naatal Mbay. 

SENEGAL RIVER VALLEY (SRV): IRRIGATED RICE 

The SRV has two major sub-regions—the Delta and Middle Valley. In the Delta, mechanized, 
commercially oriented agriculture predominates; whereas in the Middle Valley, traditional 
production methods predominate and output is primarily oriented to home consumption. The 
Delta is also recognized as an area where women have a relatively pronounced participation in the 
production and sale of irrigated rice, as reflected by the relatively large average areas cultivated by 
FHHs (3.3 ha compared to 1.7 ha for MHHs). Women’s participation in irrigated rice production is 
heavily influenced by ethnicity, however, for example in Mboudoum, women undertake rice 
production on individual plots, usually producing during both seasons of each year. In Kheune, in 

FEED THE FUTURE SENEGAL – NAATAL MBAY – WEE Strategy  

9 

contrast, women’s direct economic benefit from rice production is largely limited to the collection 
of harvest residues from shelling (“taatu naaf”) which they can sell, retaining control over the 
proceeds. In the SRV Delta, the division of labor in the fields is limited due to the heavy reliance on 
mechanization. Most productive activities in the fields are thus the responsibility of male family 
members or paid farm workers.  

In the Middle Valley, family farming predominates, and women usually work as family labor under 
the exclusive authority of senior men in the family (i.e. male heads of household). In some cases, 
women are granted access to small plots to cultivate, though they can only focus on these plots 
after fulfilling their obligations to provide labor to the males’ plots in their household. Given the 
manual nature of production, there is a clear division of labor between men and women. Women 
are primarily responsible for planting, weeding, and monitoring the fields for pests. Men, in contrast, 
are primarily responsible for application of fertilizer and pesticides, harvesting, and post-harvest 
work.  

GROUNDNUT BASIN: MAIZE, MILLET AND RAINFED RICE 

The Groundnut Basin is dominated by subsistence production of millet, maize, groundnuts, 
cowpeas, and bissap (hibiscus). Small vegetable plots (“micro-gardening”) are also common. 
Production of rainfed (RF) rice in the upland areas has also begun under the support of USAID 
projects such as PCE (Naatal Mbay’s predecessor project) and Naatal Mbay, however, production is 
still limited.  

With the exception of relatively few women who produce maize, and female members of the 
predominant producer organizations (POs) FEPROMAS, women are typically involved in the 
production of project targeted cereal production as “helpers” on plots controlled by senior male 
family members. On these plots, men are responsible for “heavy” work such as clearing and 
preparing the land for planting, while women are primarily responsible for tasks such as weeding, 
spreading fertilizer, harvesting, and post-harvest processing and preparation of food for 
consumption. Husbands will also typically grant an individual plot of land to women, on which 
women characteristically cultivate groundnuts (which have low and highly variable yields but which 
complement millet in crop rotations, are an important source of food during the lean season, and 
have low requirements for cash expenditures to produce compared to millet or maize), hibiscus, 
cowpea, and vegetables. In general, the product of these activities are consumed at home, 
complementing the grains that the men produce for household consumption. An exception to this 
is production of vegetables which women often sell, using the income to help support their families. 

SOUTHERN FOREST ZONE (SFZ): RAINFED RICE, MILLET AND MAIZE 

Rainfed rice is a staple in the SFZ, and dominates agricultural production on its small family farms 
where it is grown for household consumption. Women are also actively involved in horticulture 
(though in some areas such as Djifanghor it is also a domain for men). Women are also involved in 
millet and maize production in the Casamance, providing labor to support men’s production on 
their plots, and to a lesser extent, producing on their own plots.  

Women dominate rice production in the lowland zones (where they also cultivate maize, millet, and 
short-cycle groundnut), while men dominate in the upland zones where rice has only relatively 
recently been introduced under support of USAID projects such as PCE and Naatal Mbay. Where 
women dominate rice production, they operate on plots that are separate from men’s, and are 
typically responsible for and work independently to carry out all production operations, often 
working in conjunction with other women in the family such as co-wives. Men in lowland zones 
often cultivate millet, beans, and maize. An exception to this generalization of autonomous 
production of rice by women is in Ziguinchor where both men and women cultivate rice, though 
with responsibility for distinct cultural operations—specifically, men are responsible for land 
preparation, while women are responsible for transplanting the rice, as well as maintenance of the 
crop while it grows, including transporting compost to the fields where it will be used as fertilizer.  
10  
 

FEED THE FUTURE SENEGAL – NAATAL MBAY –WEE Strategy 

 
 

 

WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT IN AGRICULTURE 

ACCESS TO PRODUCTIVE RESOURCES 

Both  the  large-sample  survey  and  the  gender  baseline  (qualitative  and  quantitative)  results 
demonstrated that women’s access to productive resources—land, agricultural inputs and equipment, 
and finance--is characteristically more limited than men’s access (although men also face constraints 
in accessing many of these resources). An individual household’s access to these resources typically 
depends on the location, value chain, ethnicity, and other factors such as membership in producer 
organizations.  

LAND 

The results of the gender baseline analysis showed the centrality of land access to women’s economic 
empowerment. Specifically, women with greater access to land are better able to produce on their 
own  plots,  and  this  production  lends  them  greater  influence  in  household  decision  making. 
Unfortunately, women consistently have more limited access to land than men, and when they do 
have access it is typically to land that is less fertile, more isolated, and more limited in area.  

Although the 2001 Constitution promotes equal access to land for men and women, in most areas, 
customary  law  prevails,  and  tends  to  favor  men.  Women’s  access  to  land  is  frequently  mediated 
through  their  relations  with  their  husbands  or  husband’s  families;  their  access  to  land  is  thus 
dependent on their marital status. Depending on the ethnic group, widows may have the option of 
retaining access to their land after their husband’s death by marrying the husband’s eldest brother. In 
general, women-headed households have more difficulty in accessing land for cultivation.  

Women who seek to expand or improve their access to land devise alternative strategies including 
rental, sharecropping, and participation in women’s groups which lobby to obtain access to land for 
collective cultivation. Both the large-sample baseline survey (verify) and qualitative inquiries confirm 
that  land  rental  costs  are  a  significant  factor  in  cereal  production  costs  for  women,  as  shown  in 
Appendix B.  

INPUTS AND AGRICULTURAL EQUIPMENT 

Women have particularly constrained access to agricultural inputs and equipment4, as evidenced in 
the large-sample survey, and the gender baseline assessment. Differential access is seen on the basis 
of both the gender of the household head—male or female—as well as the gender of producers on 
given parcels within a given family. For example, only 2.5% of female producers used any fertilizers 
on their parcels compared to 61% of male producers.  

Women are also far more dependent on manual labor for activities 56% of women relied on manual 
soil preparation compared to only 35% of men, and 59% of women relied on hand weeding 
compared to 37% of men. Women have limited access to even rudimentary production tools, for 
example only 34% of women used hoes for weed control compared to 54% of men. Likewise, 
women relied heavily on manual rather than mechanical labor for threshing (battage). Heavy 
reliance on manual labor is broadly recognized to increase the time burden of production and/or 
production costs (depending on whether the labor comes from family or paid sources), as well as 
delay the completion of important time-sensitive agricultural tasks.  

CREDIT 

Access to credit is another major constraint faced by women and men, though women to a greater 
extent than men Self-financing predominates, though producer organizations are a means by which 
farmers increase their access to credit, particularly  for women who have weaker access to credit 
                                            
4 According to FAO, to equal access to productive resources, women could increase yields from their fields from 20 to 
30% and improve, at the same time, agricultural production in developing countries 2.5 to 4%. 

FEED THE FUTURE SENEGAL – NAATAL MBAY – WEE Strategy  

11 

through formal banking institutions. Many women also seek revolving credit through groups, or with 
informal traders or relatives. This credit, however, while quick to get and flexible to use, is typically 
available only in small amounts.  

PARTICIPATION AND INFLUENCE IN HOUSEHOLD DECISIONS 

In addition to having access to productive resources, women’s participation in and ability to 
influence important household-level decisions around production, expenditures and purchases, and 
control over their incomes, is an important factor underlying their wellbeing. In general, major 
decisions are usually the responsibility of men, however, baseline research showed that the more 
that women participate in productive activities, and contribute to household food supply and 
finances, the more influence they have in household decisions, although these also vary depending 
on the socio-economic status of a household, ethnicity, and other factors. Women’s participation in 
decision making, and their perception of being able to influence important decisions, tends to be 
higher for women who are part of a producer organization, particularly one supported by a 
program such as Naatal Mbay. Women household heads play a decisive role in household decision 
making, however, they typically make these decisions in consultation with the eldest son who is 
responsible for many of the field operations.  

While men are the primary decision makers regarding household expenditures, women’s influence 
over these decisions increases with their participation in production. Furthermore, their relative 
autonomy in production or economic activities is also associated with greater control over the 
incomes of these activities. Qualitative baseline results revealed that in many cases, women 
proactively involve their husbands in decisions about how to use incomes, or give a portion of their 
incomes to their spouse, as a means of garnering their support to continue in these activities—this 
is particularly the case for independent activities such as participation or leadership in women’s 
groups, involvement with which could be perceived to be threatening to a male household head’s 
interests. 

PARTICIPATION AND LEADERSHIP IN ORGANIZATIONS 

Senegalese women have a strong tradition of participation in organizations, particularly in the SRV and 
Groundnut  Basin,  but  the  tradition  of  working  in  organizations  is  less  rooted  in  the  SFZ.  These 
organizations  are  often  village-level  women’s  groups  oriented  to  mutual  aid  and  solidarity,  and  they 
frequently pursue economic activities and access finance collectively. Despite this tradition, women are 
generally  underrepresented  as  either  members  or  leaders  in  POs,  which  tend  to  be  male  dominated. 
Women tend to have most influence either in women-only organizations, or in mixed-gender organizations 
where they are present in large numbers and work together strategically to exert influence.  
 
While the A-WEAI results showed that generally, it is difficult for some women to speak in public or 
to be heard by men, qualitative results imply that women’s leadership in these organizations is growing 
despite men retaining a largely dominant role in them. It is also notable from the A-WEAI results that 
women who are active in the leadership of producer organizations, whether mixed-gender or women 
only, tend to be older (over 40), relatively better off (for example with larger areas of land available 
than most women), and they are often not living in their marital home (though they may be married) 
or  have  daughters-in-law  or  other  people  available  to  take  care  of  domestic  chores  for  them. 
Nonetheless, while leadership in an organization may be a relatively privileged activity, membership 
in an organization is perceived to reduce the vulnerability of women in agricultural production and 
facilitate  their  access  to  productive  assets.  In  general,  in  addition  to  the  status  that  may  privilege 
certain women to participate in and even take leadership in POs, time availability was also revealed 
during  the  qualitative  baseline  inquiries  to  be  a  major  factor  limiting  women’s  participation  in 
organizations.  

12  
 

FEED THE FUTURE SENEGAL – NAATAL MBAY –WEE Strategy 

 
 

TIME USE 

 

Women  are  recognized  throughout  Africa  to  have  a  “double  workday”  involving  both  economic 
activities  (such  as  agricultural  production  or  entrepreneurship)  as  well  as  unremunerated  “social 
reproduction”  responsibilities  such  as  the  care  of  children,  sick,  or  elderly,  food  preparation, 
community  engagement,  and  obtaining  firewood  and  water,  among  others 5 .  The  challenge  is 
particularly  acute  in  rural  areas  of  Senegal  where  women  have  little  access  to  equipment, 
infrastructure, or resources that can reduce the burden of these activities. 

The A-WEAI baseline results showed that within the project ZOI, women’s workloads are heavily 
influenced  by  their  age,  marital  status,  household  type,  socio-economic  status,  involvement  in 
producer organizations, and their contribution to the household economy. In areas with a significant 
degree  of mechanization, such  as the  SRV Delta, women spend relatively less time on agricultural 
activities.  In  contrast,  in  the  SBA  and  Casamance  where  manual  production  is  the  norm,  women 
reported  having  very  heavy  labor  loads  both  on  their  family’s  agricultural  plots  as  well  as  for 
household responsibilities.  

These  heavy  workloads  have  a  large  impact  on  women’s  economic  empowerment—as  previously 
described, they limit women’s participation and leadership in producer organizations which tend to 
increase access to productivity-enhancing technologies and markets. Time spent cultivating the fields 
of male household members also either delays women’s cultivation of their own plots or forces them 
to incur the cost of hiring labor in order to undertake operations such as planting and harvest in a 
timely manner. Finally, the heavy workloads are themselves a factor that reduces women’s wellbeing, 
particularly when they involve heavy and exhausting manual labor.  

WOMEN’S ECONOMIC EMPOWERMENT THEORY OF 
CHANGE AND STRATEGY RECOMMENDATIONS 

THEORY OF CHANGE 

 

Naatal Mbay’s technical approach rests on a theory of change in which there exists a “virtuous 
cycle” or positive feedback loop between activities that lead to increased business opportunities in 
domestic cereal value chains, catalyzing smallholder demand for productivity-enhancing inputs and 
management practices, which sustains the emergence of cost-effective and private sector-led 
production support systems. Smallholder production is enhanced through utilization of these inputs 
and management practices, allowing them to increase both their sales and the supply of foods to 
their own families. Together these gains lead to inclusive agricultural growth, enhanced smallholder 
incomes, and improved food security for the whole country.  

The demand that underlies this market-driven approach is driven by unmet opportunities to supply 
domestic cereals markets, and is channeled through Consolidation Networks (CN). CNs are 
private-sector driven, grassroots-based networks that simultaneously link smallholder producers to 
inputs, services, finance, training and a market for their product, while creating sustainable linkages 
between players along the value chain, facilitating the aggregation of farmers’ surplus and delivery to 
large-volume buyers. The immediate beneficiaries of CNs are farmers who are contracted to 
produce and sell product (that is surplus to their household consumption needs), and value chain 
players who provide services and purchase and transform the product. Project-driven benefits to 
CN participants will include market linkages, training, input and services provision, and access to 
credit; uptake of which will have direct impact on their production and household food security, 
sales, and profitability. 

                                            
5 According to the ADB, the African rural women perform a double working day, at least 50% higher than that of men. 

FEED THE FUTURE SENEGAL – NAATAL MBAY – WEE Strategy  

13 

Meanwhile, CLSPs extend key benefits of the CN model to non-contract farmers, facilitating their 
access to productivity-increasing inputs, services and markets that CN farmers enjoy, but without 
obligation of the production or marketing contracts associated with the CN model. Immediate 
beneficiaries of the CLSP models are farmers who operate as “satellites” around the CNs and 
CLSPs who provide them services through their business franchises. CLSP beneficiary farmers will 
have increased access to inputs and services which will have direct implications for their 
production, with consequent benefits for their sales and household food security. 

While women and men are eligible to pursue the opportunities inherent in this technical approach, 
the preceding text in the Background section highlights critical areas where women in particular 
may be disadvantaged in their ability to engage or succeed in these activities, considering that they 
are less economically empowered than men throughout the ZOI. Thus, the WEE strategy, while 
integrated with the overarching project theory of change, is designed to address key opportunities 
and constraints that affect women’s participation and benefits from project activities, as described in 
the preceding analysis. These may include, for example, specific value chains where women are 
particularly well-positioned to benefit, unique constraints to their participation, and labor and cost 
structures that may disproportionately disadvantage women. The theory of change underlying the 
WEE strategy, thus, builds upon the project theory of change but also incorporates strategies to 
address issues and opportunities that are specific to women. These strategies are outlined below.  

STRATEGY RECOMMENDATIONS 

The text below outlines recommendations for the strategy, along with explanations and 
justifications underlying the proposed strategies.  

1.  Retain project focus on cereals value chains (rice, maize, millet) and leverage 

opportunities to economically empower women within those value chains. Women are 
integral actors in cereal value chains as laborers (unpaid family laborers and paid laborers), 
through their own production, and in value added activities. There are opportunities to 
economically empower women through project activities, for example, by increasing their 
access to productive resources, reducing the burden and costs of production, increasing 
their influence over household-level decisions about production and disposition of output, 
and increasing their representation in the community.  

2.  Involve women and women’s organizations in commercial seed production and 

distribution. Production of seed for sale has a high value per unit of land, meaning that 
women can meaningfully increase their incomes while operating on their characteristically 
small plots. Furthermore, the predecessor project, PCE, provides Naatal Mbay with a 
foundation of successfully integrating women into commercial seed production. For 
example, in the Casamance, women’s producer organizations Kissal Patim Kolda and the 
Entente Diouloulou successfully involved women’s groups in seed production, and similar 
examples also exist in the SRV and Groundnut Basin regions. Operationalization of this 
strategy will require a multi-pronged approach that addresses numerous issues that have the 
potential to influence women’s participation in commercial seed production such as seed 
certification institutions, the national seed plan, and the development of formal and informal 
marketing systems and agro-dealer networks.  

3.  Engage women and women’s organizations to serve as CLSPs. Women are well-
positioned to provide various types of agricultural inputs and services, including seeds and 
other agro-inputs, agricultural processing services, as well as data and information services 
as field agents and database managers to CNs. These activities offer a strong complement to 
women’s home-based labors (such as elder and child care and food preparation), and 
engaging women as service providers can also help to extend the reach and improve the 
quality of these services to women farmers and entrepreneurs. To implement this strategy, 
the project should identify women and women’s organizations that are well positioned to 
serve as CLSPs, and facilitate their entry into this role. It will be important when developing 

FEED THE FUTURE SENEGAL – NAATAL MBAY –WEE Strategy 

14  
 

 
 

 

a work plan to support this strategy to investigate and accommodate the particular business 
development needs of women entrepreneurs, as well as the needs of potential women 
clients. For example, it is likely that a higher density of women service providers will need 
to be developed to compensate for mobility limitations that women face relative to men.  

4.  Reduce burden of production and post-harvest labor incurred by women in 

cereals production on their own and on men’s plots. Women have little access to 
even simple labor-saving agricultural equipment such as hoes, and in many areas, increased 
availability of mechanization services can benefit women either by reducing production costs 
or reducing their labor burden. Integrate results of recommended (under point 14) time-use 
inquiries that reveal when labor demands on women are the heaviest with qualitative 
inquiries (also discussed under point 14) to identify women’s priorities for labor-saving; and 
develop interventions to increase their access to inputs, technologies, and services that 
reduce their labor burdens in these areas.  

5.  Tailor trainings and extension to women beneficiaries. Increase participation of 

women as lead and demonstration farmers and as field extension agents. Develop training 
specifically targeted to women’s participation in cereals value chains by identifying and 
accommodating specific challenges and logistical constraints that they face.  

6.  Strengthen women’s involvement in rice production and markets.  

SFZ: Irrigated rice offers attractive financial returns and there is demonstrated potential to 
increase women’s incomes and food security through increasing their production and sales 
of rice. While there appears to be limited opportunity to increase the number of women 
participating in rice production in SRV Delta due to the fixed land base and limited 
participation of women in irrigated rice production, baseline results imply that those that do 
produce irrigated rice can benefit substantially from improving women’s market linkages, 
including use of contracts, in order to help improve prices they receive as well as increase 
their access to yield-enhancing inputs. For irrigated rice in SRV Middle Valley, the strategy 
should focus on increasing women’s access to irrigation, mechanization, producer 
organizations, and market linkages. In both sub-zones of the SRV, interventions to improve 
rice quality, and introduction of higher-value rice varieties such as aromatic rice and white 
rice also provide opportunities to increase women’s economic empowerment through 
participation in the rice value chain. 

Groundnut Basin and SFZ: In the Groundnut Basin and SFZ, women are heavily involved 
in lowland rainfed rice production, but often do not have access to land for the relatively 
more profitable upland rainfed rice production. Strategies to empower women economically 
through participation in lowland rainfed rice systems should focus on introduction of 
appropriate varieties and labor-saving technology packages, and establishment of market-
based systems for sustainable provision of those technological packages to smallholder 
farmers. These technology packages can help women to reduce their production costs, and 
complete cultivation activities in a timelier manner with attendant benefits for yields and 
profitability. Expanding production of rainfed rice through dissemination of improved 
varieties that perform well under low input systems will be particularly beneficial to women 
given their characteristically low use of inputs.  

7.  Develop, validate, and disseminate labor-saving packages for home and/or 

village-based post-harvest services. Post-harvest activities such as drying, threshing, 
sorting/grading, and milling tend to be labor-intensive and the responsibility of women who 
perform them without remuneration. Home or village-based labor-saving technological 
packages that reduce this burden and provide income to service providers can reduce the 
labor-burden on women, empowering them economically.  

8.  Explore opportunities for demand-driven value added products involving 

FEED THE FUTURE SENEGAL – NAATAL MBAY – WEE Strategy  

15 

women. Women are heavily involved in adding value to maize and millet through primary 
and secondary processing, and linking rural women to markets for value-added cereals 
offers opportunities to improve their economic standing. An example is the market for 
hulled millet in Dakar—currently millet is transported to Dakar with its hull and manually 
processed there, but there are opportunities to hull the millet in rural areas and transport 
the hulled product to Dakar for sale. 

9.  Promote the development and involvement of women’s producer organizations 

working in project value chains. Producer organizations are a key means by which 
producers, including women, gain access to productive resources, financing, and markets. 
Women’s-only organizations appear best positioned to be tailored to the needs and 
interests of women, and are a critical means by which they can empower themselves both 
politically and economically. Naatal Mbay should consider supporting both local 
organizations within the project’s ZOI as well as regional and nationally active organizations 
(for example REFAN which is based in the SRV but is expanding to be more nationally 
representative). Women’s participation in producer organizations is relatively low across 
the project’s ZOI, and particularly in the Casamance region where there is little tradition of 
this sort of community-level organization among women.  

10. Identify, assess, prioritize, and pursue opportunities to enhance women’s access 

to credit. Credit is a key constraint to expanded business activity in cereals value chains, 
particularly for women. The project should identify, assess, prioritize, and pursue 
opportunities to enhance women’s access to credit. Options include capacity building with 
women’s producer organizations to build their credit worthiness and ability to pursue and 
manage credit, working with financial institutions to sensitize them on women’s credit 
needs, promotion of innovative financial instruments that address women’s particular needs 
and constraints in accessing credit, and working with MFIs to expand their lending to 
women working in project-targeted cereals value chains.  

11. Incorporate gender training into staff and partner activities. Incorporation of 

gender training into ongoing activities (such as regular meetings or trainings) will promote 
ongoing attention to gender issues as part of regular technical activities, helping to ensure 
that gender is “mainstreamed” in the project rather than treated as a sideline or ancillary 
activity. The large scope of the project and diversity across the project ZOI also implies that 
staff and partners must be key collaborators if gender is to be successfully tailored to local 
interventions. Trainings should emphasize the relevance of gender issues to the project’s 
underlying objectives.  

12. Support project partners in sensitization and behavior change communications 

tailored to beneficiary households. These activities should be tailored to different types 
of household structures and members, and emphasize the broad-based benefits of women’s 
economic empowerment to women and families.  

13. Collaborate with other donor-funded and charitable initiatives to pursue 

synergies in gender programming. Projects like the USAID-funded SPRING have 
compatible activities which also incorporate women’s empowerment objectives. Naatal 
Mbay should identify projects and organizations with complementary activities, and pursue 
opportunities to collaborate in the development and implementation of synergistic activities 
supporting women’s empowerment.  

14. Actively integrate monitoring and evaluation into women’s economic 

empowerment activities to support learning, collaboration, and adaptive 
management. Monitoring and evaluation activities to support women’s economic 
empowerment should include the following: 
  Evaluation of project interventions should incorporate both livelihoods and time-use 

impacts, as well as financial analysis and address both inter-household and intra-
household distribution of costs and benefits of project interventions. Both ex ante and 

16  
 

FEED THE FUTURE SENEGAL – NAATAL MBAY –WEE Strategy 

 
 

 

interim analyses should be utilized to allow the project to operate proactively rather 
reactively.  

  Conduct careful ex ante analysis of the impact of specific project interventions to 

identify and address likely gender-differentiated impacts, and to garner women’s and 
men’s viewpoints on the proposed interventions. In particular, for interventions that will 
either directly or indirectly affect women (such as introduction of new technological 
packages, or initiatives to increase women’s participation in specific activities or value 
chains) explore in advance the implications and attractiveness of these initiatives to men 
and women, and proactively identify and address areas of concern. 

  Collect gender-disaggregated data where relevant for all project interventions and 

outcomes, addressing both intra-household and by gendered household head.  

  Conduct additional inquiries into specific issues identified or unresolved in baseline 

analyses. These should include 
o  Additional time-use surveys timed to different stages of the cereals production 

seasons 

o  Disaggregate A-WEAI results by key areas of relevance to project activities 
o  Differentiate between lowland and upland rainfed rice in the Casamance area 

 

Identify learning agenda questions and develop learning strategy to investigate effects of 
WEE strategy both for adaptive management and learning. Potential learning questions 
include an assessment of how the project’s theory of change holds or differs across gender 
lines, acceptance of and impact of different technological and management packages by 
gender, the effectiveness of different interventions in compensating for long-standing 
constraints to women’s participation and success in project value chains, and what dynamic 
impact of project activities are in terms of women’s empowerment across broad lines 
including with respect to women’s livelihoods, gender-based violence, and women’s 
perceptions of their overall wellbeing. 

  Conduct ongoing qualitative analysis to identify dynamic changes that may occur during the 
course of the project relating to issues such as household livelihoods, nutritional outcomes, 
gender-based violence, time use, and economic empowerment, among others. 

IMPLEMENTATION GUIDANCE AND NEXT STEPS 

A WEE work plan will be developed to guide implementation of the WEE strategy. Naatal Mbay’s 
Gender Specialist will lead development of the work plan with support from the DC-based Gender 
and Social Inclusion Advisor. This workplan will form an integral part of the project’s annual work 
plan, and will include tailored activities to implement the previously listed strategies with specific 
stakeholders, project staff and partners who are responsible and/or involved, and resource 
requirements. Implementation of the WEE strategy and the development of metrics to support its 
implementation will be spearheaded by the Gender Specialist with support from the project’s 
Communications and M&E Specialists, as well as project technical staff.  

 

 

FEED THE FUTURE SENEGAL – NAATAL MBAY – WEE Strategy  

17 

APPENDIX A: VALUE CHAIN PRODUCTION BY ZONE AND 
GENDER OF HOUSEHOLD HEAD 

Table A.1: SRV: Irrigated rice production by zone and gender of household head 

 

 

 

  

Number of plots per 
household 

Average plot size 
(ha) 

Quantity produced 
(kg) 

Delta 

Middle Valley 

MHH  

1.2 

1.7 

FHH 

1.3 

3.3 

Total 

MHH 

FHH 

Total 

1.2 

1.8 

1.1 

0.9 

1.3 

0.4 

1.1 

0.9 

11,942 

15,195 

12,056 

3,194 

1,702 

3,149 

Quantity sold (kg) 

4765 

10745 

4979 

585 

275 

576 

Receipts from sales 
(FCFA) 

Yield (kg/ha) 

Share of production 
sold 

Average price 

559,468 

1,083,667 

578,189 

74,570 

40,417 

73,520 

7,119 

30% 

130 

5,182 

7,050 

4,265 

4,940 

4,285 

42% 

30% 

14% 

20% 

15% 

88 

128 

133 

146 

133 

Income/ha 

925,470 

456,016 

902,400 

567,245 

721,240 

569,905 

Source: Naatal Mbay (2015) Baseline Study, Feed the Future Senegal Naatal Mbay. 

Table A.2: Groundnut Basin: Millet and maize production by zone and gender of household 
head 

 

 

Millet 

Maize 

Total 

MHH 

FHH 

Total 

 

  

Number of plots per 
household 

Average plot size (ha) 

Quantity produced (kg) 

Quantity sold (kg) 

Receipts from sales 
(FCFA) 

Yield (kg/ha) 

Share of production sold 

Average price 

Income/ha 

MHH  

1,6 

2,4 

1,682 

302 

FHH 

1,3 

1,6 

883 

157 

1,6 

2,3 

2,1 

1,2 

1,652 

1,105 

296 

260 

71,999 

41,692 

71,121 

58,577 

630 

12% 

211 

476 

8% 

163 

624 

12% 

210 

794 

12% 

202 

132930 

77588 

131040 

160388 

2 

0,8 

493 

0 

0 

673 

0% 

 

 

2,1 

1,2 

1,098 

257 

58,371 

793 

12% 

202 

160186 

Source: Naatal Mbay (2015) Baseline Study, Feed the Future Senegal Naatal Mbay. 

18  
 

FEED THE FUTURE SENEGAL – NAATAL MBAY –WEE Strategy 

 
 

 

 

 

FEED THE FUTURE SENEGAL – NAATAL MBAY – WEE Strategy  

19 

Table A.3: SFZ: Rainfed rice and maize production by zone and gender of household head   

 

  

Number of plots per 
household 

Average plot size (ha) 

Quantity produced (kg) 

Quantity sold (kg) 

Receipts from sales 
(FCFA) 

Yield (kg/ha) 

Share of production sold 

Average price 

Income/ha 

Rainfed Rice 

Maize 

MHH  

1.9 

1.2 

595 

238 

FHH 

1.4 

0.9 

430 

133 

Total 

MHH 

FHH 

Total 

1.9 

1.8 

1.6 

1.9 

1.2 

582 

219 

1.4 

869 

106 

0.8 

364 

63 

1.4 

854 

104 

1,725 

2,566 

1,793 

17,708 

14,250 

17,605 

696 

3% 

231 

666 

7% 

247 

693 

3% 

234 

674 

6% 

176 

572 

13% 

225 

671 

6% 

178 

160,776 

164,502 

162,162 

118,624 

128,700 

119,438 

Source: Naatal Mbay (2015) Baseline Study, Feed the Future Senegal Naatal Mbay. 

 

 

20  
 

FEED THE FUTURE SENEGAL – NAATAL MBAY –WEE Strategy 

 
 

 

APPENDIX B: VALUE CHAIN PRODUCTION COSTS BY 
ZONE AND GENDER OF HOUSEHOLD HEAD 

Table B.1: SRV: Irrigated rice production costs by zone and gender of household head 
(FCFA/ha) 

 

 

  

Labor and services 

Soil preparation 

Seeding 

Fertilization 

Weeding 

Harvest 

Threshing 

Storage 

MHH  

38798 

37757 

599 

108155 

77681 

9886 

3171 

Agricultural insurance 

10769 

Input costs 

Seeds 

Fertilizer 

Chemical pesticides 

55015 

73631 

65164 

Total expenditures 

480625 

Delta 

FHH 

Middle Valley 

Total 

MHH 

FHH 

Total 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

38033 

37658 

692 

108225 

76761 

9438 

3347 

10623 

53454 

73780 

63509 

22324 

25569 

688 

56414 

17233 

10479 

209 

1457 

24282 

74149 

22792 

475519 

255598 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

22616 

25447 

674 

55908 

17024 

10627 

207 

1650 

24237 

74175 

22876 

255441 

Source: Naatal Mbay (2015) Baseline Study, Feed the Future Senegal Naatal Mbay. 

Table B.2: Groundnut Basin: Millet and maize production costs by zone and gender of 
household head (FCFA/ha) 

 

  

Labor and services 

Soil preparation 

Seeding 

Fertilization 

Weeding 

Harvest 

Threshing 

Storage 

MHH  

Millet 

FHH 

445 

90 

238 

730 

1180 

0 

0 

0 

555 

578 

12103 

11495 

12104 

777 

421 

770 

Total 

MHH 

FHH 

Total 

Maize 

435 

88 

233 

727 

1168 

2009 

108 

172 

897 

1061 

4997 

412 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

2025 

109 

174 

904 

1070 

5084 

415 

FEED THE FUTURE SENEGAL – NAATAL MBAY – WEE Strategy  

21 

 

  

MHH  

Millet 

FHH 

Total 

MHH 

FHH 

Total 

Maize 

Agricultural insurance 

10 

0 

10 

42 

Input costs  

Seeds 

Fertilizer 

487 

756 

494 

1215 

24288 

20282 

24225 

34381 

Chemical pesticides 

0 

0 

0 

0 

Total expenditures 

40348 

34086 

40253 

45295 

Source: Naatal Mbay (2015) Baseline Study, Feed the Future Senegal Naatal Mbay. 

  

  

  

  

  

42 

1228 

34707 

0 

45757 

 
Table B.3: SFZ: Rainfed rice and maize production costs by zone and gender of household head 
(FCFA/ha) 

 

 

 

  

Labor and services 

Rainfed Rice 

Maize 

MHH  

FHH 

Total 

MHH 

FHH 

Total 

Soil preparation 

1746 

7115 

1991 

1784 

4584 

1842 

Seeding 

Fertilization 

Weeding 

Harvest 

Threshing 

Storage 

Agricultural insurance 

Input costs 

Seeds 

Fertilizer 

Chemical pesticides 

270 

88 

393 

1595 

996 

2590 

0 

633 

3003 

809 

472 

0 

779 

4578 

4930 

9507 

24 

1487 

3198 

165 

276 

82 

407 

1722 

1179 

2901 

1 

668 

2973 

766 

335 

115 

355 

674 

1502 

298 

47 

448 

11619 

2704 

739 

37 

2403 

961 

444 

67 

0 

621 

6174 

370 

343 

114 

395 

682 

1488 

295 

47 

453 

11562 

2671 

Total expenditures 

12123 

32254 

12966 

19880 

16400 

19891 

Source: Naatal Mbay (2015) Baseline Study, Feed the Future Senegal Naatal Mbay. 

22  
 

FEED THE FUTURE SENEGAL – NAATAL MBAY –WEE Strategy 

