{'Those previously involved in illegal mining have started to move back to farming': 6, 'Those who were never engaged in mining or farming have decided to take advantage of the financial opportunity': 15, 'Traditional farmers have increased output because of U.S.-led financing': 20, 'Farmers from neighboring regions have immigrated to southern Ghana': 9, 'None of the above': 0}
The final probabilities for each choice are: [0.039035651937609536, 0.2361519327660658, 0.6419275075934788, 0.07112759528101853, 0.011757312421827327]
Probability for choice A is 3.9%.
Probability for choice B is 23.62%.
Probability for choice C is 64.19%.
Probability for choice D is 7.11%.
Probability for choice E is 1.18%.
The per-choice explanations using the context are: 
Choice A (Those previously involved in illegal mining have started to move back to farming):
Justification: This option could be plausible given the context. The U.S.-led effort to promote the agricultural sector in southern Ghana, which involved a commitment of $10 million, could have provided an incentive for those previously involved in illegal mining to move back to farming. As stated in the context, 'The Agricultural Advisor with SNV Ghana, Mr. Wisdom Konwuruk, said the effects of climate on Agriculture was becoming very significant and a cause to worry about, hence the need for mitigative measures particularly in the agriculture sector to avert poor yields, low income and rather promote best practices that were environmentally friendly.' This suggests that there is a push for more sustainable practices in Ghana, which could have encouraged those previously involved in illegal mining to move back to farming.

Choice B (Those who were never engaged in mining or farming have decided to take advantage of the financial opportunity):
Justification: This option could be plausible given the context. The U.S.-led effort to promote the agricultural sector in southern Ghana, which involved a commitment of $10 million, could have attracted individuals who were previously not engaged in farming or mining. The financial opportunity presented by this initiative could have motivated them to venture into farming. As stated in the context, 'The President has also stressed that, if Ghana is to see any meaningful change in the lives of her people, efforts must be directed at Agriculture.' This suggests that there is a strong push for more people to get involved in agriculture, and the financial incentive provided by the U.S. could have been a significant motivator.

Choice C (Traditional farmers have increased output because of U.S.-led financing):
Justification: This option is highly likely given the context. The U.S.-led effort to promote the agricultural sector in southern Ghana, which involved a commitment of $10 million, could have provided traditional farmers with the necessary resources to increase their output. As stated in the context, 'Ambassador Linda Thomas-Greenfield, United States (US) Representative to the United Nations has said that the US Government’s $2.5 million scheduled development assistance in Ghana is to support farmers to increase food production.' This suggests that U.S. financing is intended to help farmers increase their output, making this a likely reason for the doubling of farming activities.

Choice D (Farmers from neighboring regions have immigrated to southern Ghana):
Justification: This option could be plausible given the context. The U.S.-led effort to promote the agricultural sector in southern Ghana, which involved a commitment of $10 million, could have attracted farmers from neighboring regions. As stated in the context, 'The new facility is being seen as one of the most important pivots in Ghana’s efforts to dramatically increase agricultural productivity and fully exploit the country’s huge but grossly under-utilized agricultural resources.' This suggests that there is a strong push to increase agricultural productivity in Ghana, which could have attracted farmers from neighboring regions.

Choice E (None of the above):
Justification: This option is unlikely given the context. The U.S.-led effort to promote the agricultural sector in southern Ghana, which involved a commitment of $10 million, is likely to have had a significant impact on farming activities in the region. As stated in the context, 'Next year is expected to see bounty harvests in crop production and significant improvements in farming methods in Ghana due to huge investments made by the United States Agency for International Development (USAID).' This suggests that the U.S. investment is expected to have a significant impact on farming activities, making it unlikely that none of the above options would be the reason for the doubling of farming activities.

CONTEXT:

The reason I am writing this is because I think that: if politicians in Ghana came out with the truth about farming, Ghana could develop its agricultural potential and as a country, with much further strides than today.

Ghana’s agricultural sector has recorded an accelerated growth of 8.4 per cent in the year 2021, up from the 7.4 per cent in 2020, Dr. Owusu Afriyie Akoto, Minister of Food and Agriculture has said.

"We're grateful to EcoCare Ghana and the European Union for what they're doing; they have assisted us in growing more seedlings on our farmlands to combat climate change, trained us on new farming methods and supported us with alternative livelihood skills to take us away from poverty”.

The President has also stressed that, if Ghana is to see any meaningful change in the lives of her people, efforts must be directed at Agriculture.

The truth is none of them did it because they love farming or farmers; the largest disappointment for me personally is that development partners have always supported Ghana and Ghanaian politicians as well on the same subject.

The study – conducted by the Institute of Climate and Environmental Governance (ICEG) and titled ‘Effects of environmental degradation on agricultural production, livelihoods, welfare and climate change in the northern region of Ghana’ – revealed that for the majority of farmers other sources of credit, rather than the banking sector, are the most preferred.

Many Ghanaian farmers are reducing the size of their farms, or giving up farming altogether because they don’t believe they can get enough yield without the inorganic fertilizer which they cannot afford.

He also indicated that, there has been a positive change in Ghanaians as it is evident in their high demand of local produce, as well as their zeal in pushing the government’s 1District, 1Factory from all angles.

It is hence not surprising to hear the president say the way to transform Ghana’s agriculture is to invite investment from the private sector.

In a communiqué issued on the 10th Biennial National delegates congress of BONABOTO in Bolgatanga, on the theme: “Climate Change, Agriculture and Poverty Alleviation in Northern Ghana” the National President-elect, Dr. Andrew Akolaa, was optimistic that, farmer incentives and subsidized inputs can make the north the food basket of Ghana and alleviate poverty.

He further warned that “if the Ghanaian government do not consider the interest of the state and the long term benefit of doing the right thing now but continues to tow this path of shortchanging the farmers all the time, the expectation that the 1 million metric ton feat which was attained in 2011 will be replicated in the next crop season will be a fallacy”.

Palgrave Boakye-Danquah opined that, the impact of the policy on Ghana’s agricultural sector has been astounding and he’s hopeful the policy will continue yielding phenomenal results in the coming years.

According to him, the impact of the policy in Ghana’s agricultural sector has been astounding and he’s hopeful the policy will continue yielding phenomenal results in the coming years.

With the establishment of the Tree Crop Development Authority, the Minister was hopeful Ghana’s agriculture earnings could see an increase to $16 billion in the next 10 years.

Ghanaian farmers get that even more now.

It is a recognised fact that small-scale farmers in Ghana are the backbone and the hope of any meaningful increase in food production.

Ambassador Linda Thomas-Greenfield, United States (US) Representative to the United Nations has said that the US Government’s $2.5 million scheduled development assistance in Ghana is to support farmers to increase food production.

Ghana is a signatory to the Comprehensive African Agricultural Development Programme of 2003 (Malabo Declaration), in which member-countries were expected to increase agricultural investment to 10 percent of annual budgets to culminate into, at least, six percent growth in the sector annually; but the country has failed to do that since.

The Agricultural Economist who served in the UN systems for 18 years believes Ghana could achieve more if the country prioritizes public funding in the agriculture sector, with a special focus on mechanized farming.

In other to do good with agriculture, we don’t see any reason why Ghana would be a less progressed than other countries in the world and you definitely think that Ghanaian farmers with the help of the Israeli companies and Israeli know-how and technologies be able to progress and export their yields and crops to the world.

We believe this is the way to transform Ghana’s agriculture as we target to move away from subsistence to a business-centered approach to agriculture “.

It is good that the oil and gas sector is recovering but the immediate impact on the pocket of the Ghanaian is doubtful right now so if you have agriculture not catching up or doing not quite well in this space, we need to look at the numbers again…,” he stated.

I want to believe the Burkinabes are benefitting from the so-called planting for food and jobs more than Ghanaians.

Therefore, the Ghanaian Times believes the move in the area of agricultural mechanisation would be implemented and sustained for increased food production.

“We believe this is the way to transform Ghana’s agriculture as we target to move from subsistence to a business-centered approach to agriculture.

Therefore, even if the President knowingly exaggerated Ghana’s growth rate – which completely neutral commentators agree is most unlikely – it was to improve Ghana’s economic fortunes rather than for political gain for himself and the ruling party which he leads.

Given the current economic crisis in Ghana, which is affecting the lack of fertilizer and seed inputs for farmers, strengthening the seed sector and increasing the use of improved seeds is expected to boost crop yields, and transform the food system that feeds the country, a statement from The Alliance for the Green Revolution in Africa (AGRA), which is spearheading the initiative said.

The Agricultural Advisor with SNV Ghana, Mr. Wisdom Konwuruk, said the effects of climate on Agriculture was becoming very significant and a cause to worry about, hence the need for mitigative measures particularly in the agriculture sector to avert poor yields, low income and rather promote best practices that were environmentally friendly.

This was during a time many Ghanaians were complaining of economic hardships, also because nearly everything in the country had seen an astronomical increase in prices, including fuel, food, the rate of the Ghana cedi against the US dollar, among others.

I don’t think the mere bad farming practices of the Ghanaian farmer can contribute much to these adverse effects.

• He believes the next crop of entrepreneurs in Ghana can lead to a massive economic transformation

Though the Akufo-Addo government implemented the Planting for Food and Jobs programme and other social interventions to solve this issue, some Ghanaians feel a lot more needs to be done.

But let me stress that any eventual problems that may emerge should have a positive impact on the agric economy of Ghana, the immediate effect will be on the agric economy of Burkina Faso, so I think our farmers must rather take advantage of this.

In the area of agriculture, the report said Ghanaians are also nearly equally split in their confidence in government to consolidate the gains made in the planting/rearing for food & job programs in the next 4 years.

I strongly believe, Agriculture, will lift Ghana out of poverty and assure us not only of food and nutrition security, but also, generate the necessary resources for the development of the other sectors including Industry, Health, Education and Infrastructure in the medium to long term.

Next year is expected to see bounty harvests in crop production and significant improvements in farming methods in Ghana due to huge investments made by the United States Agency for International Development (USAID)

Ghana will need to invest between US$9.3 and US$15.5billion to implement the 47 Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) as key measures to mitigate the impacts of climate change by 2030, the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) has said in its 2023 Ghana Climate Change Report.

Former US President, Thomas Jefferson, once said, “Agriculture is our wisest pursuit, because it will in the end contribute most to real wealth, good morals, and happiness” but in Ghana poor policies have made a lot of our young people turn their backs on Agriculture and whole society is suffering today.

We need to appreciate that until reforms in production go alongside with marketing reforms, it is going to be difficult to turn around the economic fortunes of Ghana through agriculture.

I felt very ashamed as Ghanaian that having gained independence and have governments in place at this time and this is the quagmire our farmers are going through to think that out of 130 billion dollars only about 2 billion is actually gained by Ghana from that then we are better of reverting to the time of late Former President Kwame Nkrumah when he decided to actually burn the cocoa beans at the port to send a certain signal and to cause some changes.

If all is well with Ghana’s Agric Sector as the NPP would want us to believe:

If all is well with Ghana’s Agric Sector as the NPP would want us believe:

He said as long as the farmers longed for approved quality seeds, coupled with other agronomic activities, Ghana was assured of increased productivity, food and jobs for the ever-growing population.

The new facility is being seen as one of the most important pivots in Ghana’s efforts to dramatically increase agricultural productivity and fully exploit the country’s huge but grossly under-utilized agricultural resources.

Again, in a bad situation, where nature does not favour Northern Ghana, as climate change effects consistently change the weather patterns from bad to worse, giving it just four months of erratic rainfalls and depending on ineffective speculations of weather behaviours, that limits production of food crops during the minor season mainly to southern Ghana districts, gives room for worry.

It is evident that there has been an improvement in production and Ghana is likely to meet its 2016/2017 crop season target of 900,000 metric tonnes.

President Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo, has attributed the impressive 8.36% growth witnessed in Ghana’s agricultural sector in 2017 to effective policy making and implementation by his government.

He was aware that with rapid growth, the number of production components would increase, enabling Ghana to completely develop and support its economy, without depending much on foreign nations.

Government appreciates fully that value addition is the one of the best ways to unlocking the huge potential of Ghana’s agriculture.

This caused a drastic reduction in imports because the international markets did not want to export to Ghana with the fear that we would not be able to pay for the goods they export to our country.

But some farmers told Ghanacrusader.com they are disappointed with the 5.2 percent increase.

Speaking in an interview with the Ghana News Agency, he said farmers “are continuously faced with increasing prices of inputs and other costs of production, reducing their ability to produce as expected.

They expect it from the government, from the importers, and from you reading this as a stakeholder in Ghana’s agricultural sector.

He stressed that when that is not done, agriculture which is the backbone of the Ghanaian economy will continue to suffer.

Throughout Ghana’s history, agriculture has been recognized as the most important sector, employing half of the country’s population while at the same time contributing significantly to the economy.
