{'Ghanaians that were participating in illegal mining felt comfortable applying for a license because of the shortened wait time': 12, 'Ghanaians who were not previously mining now see it as a new economic opportunity': 8, 'Ghanaians are influenced to seek mining licenses by their friends/family': 4, 'None of the above': 0}
The final probabilities for each choice are: [0.5740714535714136, 0.25794693156251086, 0.11590302755619888, 0.05207858730987663]
Probability for choice A is 57.41%.
Probability for choice B is 25.79%.
Probability for choice C is 11.59%.
Probability for choice D is 5.21%.
The per-choice explanations using the context are: 
Choice A (Ghanaians that were participating in illegal mining felt comfortable applying for a license because of the shortened wait time):
Justification: This option is highly plausible given the context. The context mentions that 'illegal mining in the country has been a topical issue in the country for the past few years sparking major campaigns and outrage by Ghanaians especially over the negative impact on the activities on water bodies and lands.' The reduction in the time it takes to obtain a mining license could have made it more appealing for those involved in illegal mining to apply for a license and operate legally. Furthermore, the context mentions that 'the government had enhanced the punishment regime and increased the punishment for people engaging in illegal mining.' This could have served as an additional incentive for those involved in illegal mining to apply for a license.

Choice B (Ghanaians who were not previously mining now see it as a new economic opportunity):
Justification: This option is plausible given the context. The reduction in the time it takes to obtain a mining license from three years to three months could have made mining a more attractive economic opportunity for Ghanaians who were not previously involved in the industry. The context mentions that 'the Youth In Development an NGO believes that creating awareness among local communities affected by mining on policies and laws aimed at getting Ghana to benefit more from Mining is the surest way of influencing enforcement.' This suggests that there is a push to involve more locals in the mining industry. Additionally, the context also mentions that 'the Minister said the nation ought to aspire for more local participation in the mining industry.' This further supports the idea that more Ghanaians could have been encouraged to apply for mining licenses due to the reduced wait time.

Choice C (Ghanaians are influenced to seek mining licenses by their friends/family):
Justification: While the context does not provide direct evidence to support this option, it is possible that Ghanaians could have been influenced by their friends or family to seek mining licenses. The context mentions that 'the mineral resources belong to each and everyone one of us, so generally the people of Ghana should understand the mining industry.' This suggests that there is a communal understanding and involvement in the mining industry, which could potentially include influence from friends and family. However, without more specific information, this option remains speculative.

Choice D (None of the above):
Justification: This option cannot be justified without considering the other options. However, based on the context provided, it is clear that there are several factors that could have influenced the increase in mining license applications, including the reduced wait time and the push for more local involvement in the mining industry. Therefore, it is unlikely that none of the above options played a role.

CONTEXT:

Whereas prior to 2013 many miners sought to establish long term operations in Ghana, after 2013 they began instead to follow a three year cycle.

Citing the decision by both the Lands Ministry and the Forestry Commission to grant mining and entry permits into Ghana’s forest reserves in 2018 when there was still an active ban on all forms of large and small-scale mining activities in the country, the NDC argued that government’s fight against the illegal mining menace was a ruse to enable some persons in both government and party to appropriate the illicit trade for themselves.

Sanctioning the moratorium on the operations of general small-scale mining activities in Ghana has brought untold hardship on us and most Ghanaians in the areas where the small-scale mining is based, it is practically our hope that, the vision that our President has will go a long way in vindicating the measures that are rolled out to propel the future of the small-scale mining industry”.

The minister noted that with the support of the House, under the Minerals and Mining Amendment Act, 2019 (Act 995), the government had enhanced the punishment regime and increased the punishment for people engaging in illegal mining to a minimum of 15 years imprisonment together with a fine of not less than 10, 000 penalty units for Ghanaians, and a minimum of 20 years imprisonment, together with a fine of not less than 100,000 penalty units for foreigners with the hope that those found guilty would be made to face the full rigorous of the law.

“We hope that the Ghanaian government will pay due attention to this situation, take the necessary action to stop such things from happening again and guide the media to give an objective coverage on the illegal mining issue so as to create a good environment for further development of our bilateral exchanges and cooperation.

There continue to be growing opinions in fighting the menace of illegal mining with several Ghanaians proposing different ways to tackle the situation which has greatly affected the integrity of several water bodies across the country and the latest to add his bit is the NDC MP.

The proponents want the Government of Ghana to ensure that clean, scientific and environmentally friendly technologies are deployed in the mining of mineral resources in the Volta and Oti Regions and undertake contracts that would be of immense benefit to landowners and communities.

According to the Lease Letter from the Ministry of Lands and Natural Resources, once the Company, TGGL warranted that it had the wherewithal in terms of finance, technical, and human resources to undertake efficient mining operations, and had declared its willingness to engage in mining in Ghana, the Government of Ghana could not, but grant the rights to mine in the specified area to it, and maybe renewed periodically in accordance with the law.

Per this logic, it is therefore proper to allow foreigners to plunder our natural resources and give paltry sums in return, whilst the government wants the Ghanaian people to believe that it is ungodly to engage in small scale mining.

This is mainly because, public benefits from the Government's mining activities have not been realized, as mining leases are mainly granted by the Minister of Lands and Natural Resources (Section 34 of the Minerals and Mining Act 2006) to foreign companies and individuals (p. 4, Ghana Mining Industry Review) which are believed to be based on their interests, and not on the interests of the state.

“The association is not oblivious of the reservations of the government and the populace to some of the ills of our activities and its attendant effects on the environment, which has resulted in a six-month moratorium on all forms of small-scale mining activities in Ghana.

Ghana is fast becoming like how El-Salvador was before the ban on mining, but even though government is doing all it can to bring a complete halt to all such methods of mining, not only society, but some members of state institution like the Ghana Immigration Service and also some traditional leaders, do not support this.

Delivering a paper on the topic, “The Legal Regime of the Mining Sector in Ghana”, at a public lecture in Kumasi, organized by the Students’ Representative Council (SRC) of the Ghana School of Law, the Minister said the nation ought to aspire for more local participation in the mining industry.

Despite the conventional knowledge in Ghana that the activities of some mining companies have severely impacted negatively on the environment, coupled with the notion that not enough is being done about this by sector regulators, this might not exactly be the situation in every circumstance.

“It is in this spirit that the government of Ghana in March 2016 signed a development Agreement with Gold Fields Ghana covering it’s operations in Tarkwa and Damang Mines expected to run for 11 and 9 years respectively.

“They are expected to run until the expiration of the last mining lease in Ghana”, the AG opined, adding: “The agreements also appear to be cast in stone with no options to evaluate their effectiveness and/or satisfactory performance to renew or terminate should the need arise.

Even though sanctioning the moratorium on the operations of general small scale mining activities in Ghana has brought untold hardship on us and most Ghanaians in the areas where the small scale mining are based, it is practically our hope that, the vision that our President has will go a long way in vindicating the measures that is rolled out to propel the future of the small scale mining industry.

“They are expected to run until the expiration of the last mining lease in Ghana”, the AG opined, adding: “The agreements also appear to be cast in stone with no options to evaluate their effectiveness and/or satisfactory performance so as to renew or terminate same should the need arise.

“We see this development to be extremely serious breaches of Ghanaians’ trust, and in some cases breaches of administration procedures, guidelines and laws regarding mining in protected forest reserves by the Government of Ghana itself,” he added.

“We think it is very important that any operation against illegal mining should be carried out in line with Ghanaian laws and international recognized norms, the mass arrest and media hype should be minimized, the cases should be dealt with on individual base and the legitimate rights of the miners should be respected,” it said.

According to her, the NDC has been in government for eight years but Ghanaians never really saw any upfront charge taken to cure the menace of illegal mining.

“We need to bridge the trust gap between government and the mining industry, which I think is not peculiar to Ghana alone.

He explained that mining licence for small scale mining was solely for Ghanaians and that it was an offence to grant foreigners licence to engage in small scale mining, adding that it was unfortunate that some Ghanaians front for foreigners to acquire licence to engage in small scale mining.

“We believe that we have a responsibility to go round the country and brief the citizens on especially responsible and sustainable mining, because the mineral resources belong to each and everyone one of us, so generally the people of Ghana should understand the mining industry and that’s why we decided that we should move out of the mining areas and come to the north.

The results of the research also showed that 37% of Ghanaians are satisfied with government’s fight against illegal mining (galamsey), which is gradually restoring the purity of some of the water bodies lost to the illegal activities.

“They were the ones that provided the mining equipment, most of the Ghanaians left behind can’t continue their operations,” said one of the local residents, but many Ghanaians concerned about the health and environmental hazards lauded the government’s efforts to curb illegal mining.

The amount will, however, double based on the number of devices owned by a household The decision to create the courts has sparked public outrage, with some Ghanaians saying they are ready to go to jail for non-payment of the license.

We hope that the Ghanaian government will pay due attention to this situation, take the necessary action to stop such things from happening again and guide the media to give an objective coverage on the illegal mining issue so as to create a good environment for further development of our bilateral exchanges and cooperation.

It has been predicted that Ghana may import water by 2030 if illegal mining is not banned.

We believe in responsible mining and we strongly support the enforcement of the country’s law to curb irresponsible and illegal mining that is causing a lot of harm to the environment and health of Ghanaians.

“Today without any form of license, some Ghanaians are conniving with foreigners to mine everywhere with explosives and machinery in forest reserves and water bodies,” Akufo-Addo said at the launch of the National Alternative Employment programme for Illegal Mines.

Furthermore, the engineer thought that formalized small-scale mining are operated in USA, Canada, Colombia, Peru, etc, without water pollution so Ghanaians can replicate same in Ghana.

Ghana, just like any other country pursuing the license, is expected to build a strong legality system to prove to potential buyers that its wood is sourced legally for sustainable conservation of the forests.

Illegal mining in the country has been a topical issue in the country for the past few years sparking major campaigns and outrage by Ghanaians especially over the negative impact on the activities on water bodies and lands.

We hope that the Ghanaian government will pay due attention to this situation, take the necessary action to stop such things from happening again and guide the media to give an objective coverage on the illegal mining issue so as to create a good environment for further development of our bilateral exchanges and cooperation,” the mission said.

I don’t think we have Ghanaians who are satisfied with the way our mining communities are.

The President also recognised the work undertaken by Parliament of Ghana to amend the Mining Act to raise the penalties for illegal mining, and prohibiting foreign nationals from participating in any way in small-scale mining.

With the support of the government and various stakeholders, this responsible mining approach is expected to have a positive impact on the local community and contribute to Ghana's sustainable development.

The company which spent US$67.5million to acquire the license which is valid for the next 15 years, is hoping to raise about 500 million dollars in order to offload 35 percent of its business in Ghana to locals.

We hope that the Ghanaian government will pay due attention to this situation, take the necessary action to stop such things from happening again and guide the media to give an objective coverage on the illegal mining issue so as to create a good environment for further development of our bilateral exchanges and cooperation,” the letter said.

In a bid to help the country benefit more from the mining industry, the Youth In Development an NGO believes that creating awareness among local communities affected by mining on policies and laws aimed at getting Ghana to benefit more from Mining is the surest way of influencing enforcement.

The Minister for Environment, Science and Technology, Professor Kwabena Frimpong-Boateng, has stressed the importance of ending illegal mining in Ghana.

Looking at the current situation, I think that the government is taking Ghanaians for granted.

However, in the long term, Ghanaians stand to benefit because Ghanaians have called for this for a long time.

The Minister of Science, Environment, Technology and Innovation also said the lifting of the ban on small-scale mining “does not mean foreign miners who are hiding in Ghana or escaped into neighbouring countries can come and continue their illegal activities.
